[Amit Varma]: This episode is being recorded on December 24th, and India is in ferment. Protests are
[Amit Varma]: ongoing across the country in response to this Government Citizenship Amendment Act,
[Amit Varma]: and the state is cracking down on innocent and defenseless citizens with incredible violence.
[Amit Varma]: The reports that have been coming out of UP, for example, are just horrendous. I had an
[Amit Varma]: episode last week with Srinath Raghavan that gave deep historical context to the notion
[Amit Varma]: of citizenship in India, the history of the NRC, the troubled history of Assam, the current
[Amit Varma]: consolidation of Hindutva, and student politics. I recommend you check that out. At this moment
[Amit Varma]: in time, all the focus is on the BJP's radical social agenda and all the dangers it poses
[Amit Varma]: for our nation. So why am I doing an episode on economics? Because I believe economics
[Amit Varma]: matters. People often think of economics as an arcane, abstract subject, numbers and graphs
[Amit Varma]: floating in the air above us that don't actually have an impact on people's lives. That could
[Amit Varma]: not be further from the truth. Everything in our lives is shaped by economics, and often
[Amit Varma]: by economic policies we cannot control, decided somewhere far off by social engineers who
[Amit Varma]: believe they can design society, influenced by special interests who are experts at redistributing
[Amit Varma]: money from the poor to the rich. This is not a problem of this government alone. For decades,
[Amit Varma]: we have suffered from bad economics, and the poor have suffered the most. Perhaps that's
[Amit Varma]: why we have even normalized it, and we take it for granted. But we must not. Bad economics
[Unknown]: has a humanitarian cost. Economics matters. Welcome to the scene and the unseen. Our weekly
[Unknown]: podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Varma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. One of the reasons that the BJP won in 2014 was a
[Amit Varma]: consequence of the bad economics of previous governments, especially the UPA right before
[Amit Varma]: it. Many people who voted for the BJP in 2014 did so assuming that they would not further
[Amit Varma]: the social agenda and they do economic reforms. Well, we can see what's happening on the social
[Amit Varma]: front. As for economics, at first they carried out no reforms at all. And then they progressively
[Amit Varma]: carried out what I can only describe as economic deforms, which only damaged the economy. I've
[Amit Varma]: had many episodes on demonetization and the botched implementation of GST, both of which
[Amit Varma]: basically helped devastate our economy. Those episodes will be linked from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: In a nutshell, instead of helping to free our markets further, we now have less free
[Amit Varma]: markets and lower growth. Mahatma Gandhi once said that he would judge every policy by what
[Amit Varma]: impact it had on the poorest of poor Indians. And that is exactly my yardstick. It has been
[Amit Varma]: estimated that every 1% of GDP growth in India takes 2 million people out of poverty. If
[Amit Varma]: that growth goes down, it has a humanitarian cost. It's a human tragedy. And that growth
[Amit Varma]: has unquestionably gone down in recent years. In this episode, as the year draws to a close,
[Amit Varma]: I'm only going to focus on 2019. Where we started the year, what were our causes for
[Amit Varma]: hope and despair? And how have we performed through this year? My guest for this episode
[Amit Varma]: is Vivek Kaul, also known as the Shahrukh Khan of economics. Every time some news comes
[Amit Varma]: that has anything to do with the economy, there is an outpouring of requests on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: for Vivek's take on the matter. Vivek, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks Amit for having me.
[Amit Varma]: So as we are sort of, you know, one of the constant criticisms you get on Twitter from
[Amit Varma]: people is that Vivek, why don't you write about good news once in a while, it's always
[Amit Varma]: bad news, bad news. What's your response to that?
[Guest]: I mean, as I tweeted out recently, if you want good news, you should follow the Twitter
[Guest]: handle of the Press Information Bureau, and the various ministries of the Government of
[Amit Varma]: India. I mean, they'll give you all the good news that you want. So yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess what you do as an economist, we just look at the numbers and talk about what
[Guest]: the numbers show. And if then what
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, so broadly, yes, I mean, which is how it is. And at least in the last few
[Guest]: years, I mean, since demonetization happened, there is hardly been anything good to talk
[Guest]: about. I mean, a couple of things notwithstanding, I mean, like, if you look at how the insolvency
[Guest]: and the bankruptcy code has gone, it can be called sort of a partial success. I mean,
[Guest]: despite the fact that it was launched with very little preparation, and the fact that
[Guest]: our legal system wasn't really, you know, ready for it, it has managed to deliver a
[Guest]: few good things, especially given the fact that some of the largest corporates who had
[Guest]: defaulted on their loans, have lost control of the companies. And I think that is very,
[Guest]: very important, because you know, more than the recovery, I mean, recovery is important.
[Guest]: But even if recovery does not happen, and decent recovery doesn't happen, and corporates
[Guest]: lose control of the company, the message that it sends across is very, very strong. So,
[Guest]: in the years to come, any corporate who previously has been in the habit of defaulting on loans
[Guest]: and getting away with it, will think more than twice, you know, before doing anything
[Guest]: like that, because he's likely to lose control of his company. So, I think that's one good
[Guest]: thing that's clearly happened in the last few years.
[Guest]: The other good thing, again, I mean, this is not something specific to this year, but
[Guest]: so, you know, up until a few years back, there used to be a funny home loan deduction that
[Guest]: used to be available to the taxpayer. So, if you bought your first home, the total interest
[Guest]: that you could take as a deduction was limited to around one and a half lakh rupees, which
[Guest]: was later raised to two lakh rupees. But if you bought your second, third, fourth, fifth,
[Guest]: sixth, or whatever your 10th home, the entire interest on your home loan could be taken
[Guest]: as a deduction from your taxable income, as long as you declared a notional rent. And
[Guest]: this was a huge tax saving device for especially for people at senior levels in corporate India.
[Guest]: And I mean, the one thing that I never sort of figured out is was why should the government
[Guest]: of India encourage people to buy a second, third or a fourth home? I mean, I can understand
[Guest]: encouraging people to buy their first home and giving them a limited tax deduction. But
[Guest]: so, so Arun Jaitley did away with that in one of the budgets. I thought that was also
[Guest]: a great move. So, these are, you know, two good decisions that I can immediately think
[Amit Varma]: about. So,
[Amit Varma]: And, and, you know, and I, of course, don't have any home. So, none of this makes a difference
[Amit Varma]: to me. But the largest question I'm going to ask is, you know, as someone who's commented
[Amit Varma]: on economics for a decade and a half, what happens to the economy is often a consequence
[Amit Varma]: of decisions taken long ago, there's a big lag sometimes between an economic policy actually
[Amit Varma]: being announced and implemented, and then with the results of that being failed. And
[Amit Varma]: you know, one example of this, which people doubt is that some of Vajpayee's reforms,
[Amit Varma]: they started actually showing the effects only in UPA 1 and the UPA 1 gets credit for
[Amit Varma]: those numbers. And similarly, a lot of what has gone wrong with the economy today, in
[Amit Varma]: a sense started with the bad loans, so to say, the phono loans policy of the UPA 2 government,
[Amit Varma]: especially when Pranab Mukherjee was finance minister. And I of course, had a great episode
[Amit Varma]: with Pooja Mehra, which really elaborates on those sort of events in granular detail.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of what is what 2019 started with a lot of what we have seen unfolding through
[Amit Varma]: 2019, and tell me if you agree, is essentially the inevitable consequences of DEMON and the
[Amit Varma]: botched implementation of GST. Like we thought at least I thought that DEMON, when it was
[Amit Varma]: announced, I thought on the same day that this is going to devastate the economy. But
[Amit Varma]: it took a while for that to actually happen. Or if it did happen immediately, it took a
[Amit Varma]: while for those numbers to come. But this year, there can pretty much be no doubt that
[Amit Varma]: the full consequences of the bad economic management of the last few years is now unfolding.
[Guest]: What do you think?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I mean, I agree with you completely on that. See, I think what happens is and
[Guest]: this is, you know, more anecdotal than data driven. And because I've seen some of my friends
[Guest]: struggle with it, you know, when you're running a small enterprise, and you start facing headwinds,
[Guest]: you don't shut it down immediately, right? Because I mean, you started it, and that's
[Guest]: the only thing you do. So it takes time for you to sort of realize that this is not working.
[Guest]: Now, I guess that's, that's something that's happened because of one demonetization and
[Guest]: the botched up implementation of GST. The informal sector and the smaller players in
[Guest]: the formal sector have over a period of last two to three years, been facing a lot of pressure
[Guest]: on the performance front. And that pressure is now, you know, starting to show and it's
[Guest]: triggered into the overall broader economy as well. Yeah, I mean, I would agree with
[Amit Varma]: that completely.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing to remember here is also that economists use a term called welfare shocks.
[Amit Varma]: And what is a welfare shock? What happens is that when something like demonetization
[Amit Varma]: happens, and, you know, somebody who's running a business on the margins in the informal
[Amit Varma]: sector, and remember, he's on the informal sector, not because he wants to evade the
[Amit Varma]: law, but because of the panoply of bad laws and regulations we have, which force many
[Amit Varma]: entrepreneurs into the informal sector. And if someone on the margins like that goes out
[Amit Varma]: of business, it is not the case that when the economy gets back, he can just, you know,
[Amit Varma]: come back and start the business again. Like, for example, I may have a business running
[Amit Varma]: two ACs, I can't afford to run two, I start running one, when things get better, I put
[Amit Varma]: the second AC back on. But that's not how this works. These people suffer what is called
[Amit Varma]: welfare shocks, where once they are done, they are completely done. And you know, they
[Amit Varma]: just don't come back, they're down for good, they just fall from that status level, they
[Amit Varma]: might go slip back below the poverty line, if that's where they came from. And the other
[Amit Varma]: problem there, and I'm also going to ask you about this, is that it's very hard for people
[Amit Varma]: to get a grip on it, because there is actually no data from the informal sector.
[Guest]: Yes, so there's very little data that actually comes out in a formal way for the informal
[Guest]: sector. But there are enough, I mean, if you look at a lot of the industry, small industry
[Guest]: associations, they have put out a lot of data over the last few years, which tells you that
[Guest]: a lot of small enterprises have been destroyed in the aftermath of demonetization and a botched
[Guest]: up implementation of the GST. I mean, you know, a great example is a place like Tirupur,
[Guest]: which used to be a global hub for producing t-shirts. And, you know, the mess that the
[Guest]: city got into after demonetization is very well documented. And a lot of players operating
[Guest]: in Tirupur were basically, you know, small players who sort of employed up to 50 people.
[Guest]: So, you know, bits and parts of it are pretty well documented. Obviously, it's not documented
[Guest]: at an overall economic level. Having said that, you know, the interesting thing is,
[Guest]: you know, when demonetization happened, most corporates like the idea because what they
[Guest]: thought was that the informal sector will now get formalized, and they will benefit
[Guest]: because of it because their business will go up. But what they did not realize was that
[Guest]: if the informal sector of the country gets destroyed, the purchasing power or the consumption
[Guest]: power of people who used to work in that informal sector also comes down. You know, and that
[Guest]: has also impacted the corporate revenues and earnings in a big way over the last few years.
[Guest]: Another point I wanted to make here was that, you know, this and I mean, this is something
[Guest]: I've said before, but it is important to say it again, is that over the years, you know,
[Guest]: the informal sector in India has often been linked to the black economy, right? Which
[Guest]: is partly true. Yes, I mean, people who are making money there do not pay income tax,
[Guest]: but you also need to take into account the fact that a lot of people or in fact, most
[Guest]: of the people who work in the informal sector do not make enough money to be paying income
[Guest]: tax. So while the owner himself may be waiting on tax, you know, people who work there, I
[Guest]: mean, they don't need to pay tax, but and they do pay tax, indirect tax, like we all
[Guest]: do. So, so I think these are, you know, some points that people need to realize that nothing
[Guest]: is all black, because, you know, ultimately, when black money is also spent, you know,
[Guest]: the guy who earns it, at some level does pay tax on it. I mean, it's it may not be a direct
[Guest]: tax, but he's definitely paying an indirect tax.
[Amit Varma]: No, and you brought up a very interesting point there in passing, which I want to elaborate
[Amit Varma]: on very briefly, which is actually triggered by something I saw on Twitter today, which
[Amit Varma]: is a post by Kangana Ranaut, where she's talking about the alleged violence done by protesters.
[Amit Varma]: And she's saying only 3% of us pay tax and the rest of the people are freeloaders. And
[Amit Varma]: the point is, no, you know, only a small percentage pays income tax. But every single person in
[Amit Varma]: this country plays tax in some sort of the other every time you buy a little bit of salt,
[Amit Varma]: or you buy a bar of soap, you are paying tax, we are all participants in this democracy,
[Amit Varma]: and we all have a stake.
[Guest]: And also, there's an interesting point, you know, I mean, some point to that point, which
[Guest]: is that, you know, this three to 4% number, paying income tax is also extremely exaggerated,
[Guest]: because the bulk of individual income tax is paid by when I done a calculation some
[Guest]: time back, around 0.26% of India's population pays around 80% of its individual income tax.
[Guest]: So it's not even three or 4%. But having said that, everybody pays indirect tax. No, I mean,
[Guest]: if such a small proportion of people pay income tax in the country, what it shows is, one,
[Guest]: the general poverty of the country, and two, the fact that our income tax department has
[Guest]: really not been up to the mark and a bad tax policies, which, you know, at some level over
[Guest]: the years have led to a situation where people simply they feel they're dealing in black
[Amit Varma]: rather than dealing with the, with the system and dealing in black being part of the informal
[Amit Varma]: sector actually carries significant costs. So the very fact that people tend to do so
[Amit Varma]: should, you know, show you how onerous regulatory structures are, do they feel the need to somehow
[Amit Varma]: kind of stay out of it, you know, like before we get to 2019, of course, just to sort of
[Amit Varma]: set the context, I was chatting with a couple of my friends about, you know, this episode
[Amit Varma]: that I'm talking to Vivek, is there something you'd like me to discuss? And one of them
[Amit Varma]: Devanshu Dutta said, hey, please ask him about how much the phrase he used, I really liked
[Amit Varma]: it was a forced formalization, how much the forced formalization attempted by the government
[Amit Varma]: has contributed to this and forced formalization was, of course, the one of the stated intents
[Amit Varma]: of demonetization that bring the informal into the formal sector, to which another of
[Amit Varma]: my friends, Mohit Satyanand, and both of these guys have been on my show before. And Mohit
[Amit Varma]: Satyanand said that he wouldn't call it forced formalization as much as forced exits, because
[Amit Varma]: what demon forced many people to do was exit rather than formalize.
[Guest]: Yeah, so which is precisely the point I was making, you know, corporates, the big corporates
[Guest]: were initially very happy, because they thought that, you know, formalization will now happen
[Guest]: and they'll benefit. But what has happened is that, while the informal sector has been
[Guest]: destroyed, that business hasn't moved to the formal sector, simply because when the informal
[Guest]: sector gets destroyed, you know, a lot of people lose their jobs, the purchasing power
[Guest]: comes down. And once the purchasing power comes down, at some level, it does impact
[Guest]: consumption. And that leads to a situation where corporates do not benefit from, you
[Guest]: know, forced formalization. But as Mohit rightly put it, it's more of forced exits. So, which
[Guest]: is what has happened in the last few years.
[Amit Varma]: So, basically, there's a Procter and Gamble, which is making soap, which is making whatever
[Amit Varma]: it makes, and suddenly people are buying less of that, because they are in the, they have
[Guest]: to make.
[Guest]: And there's data to back that up. So, if you look at, so, you know, you look at Hindustan
[Guest]: Unilever, which is, you know, good benchmark for anything in the consumption economy in
[Guest]: India. So, if you look at the volume growth, which is basically the growth in the number
[Guest]: of units, they sell and not the revenue. So, that was in 2018, the unit growth was 10 to
[Guest]: 12%. This year, it's come down to 5%. So, that tells you that the pace of FMCG growth
[Guest]: has halved. So, that is a, that's a huge thing. So, that should tell you that all this, you
[Guest]: know, these theories of forced formalization haven't really worked.
[Amit Varma]: So, and my other question to you is that you're someone who watches the economy very closely,
[Amit Varma]: right? Now, we know that a lot of the numbers that the government puts out are extremely
[Amit Varma]: unreliable. And, you know, even with something like the GDP numbers, even if you take the
[Amit Varma]: GDP numbers, say at face value, and I had a long episode with Rajeshwari Sengupta on
[Amit Varma]: this where we discuss why they cannot be taken at face value, but going deeper into the problems
[Amit Varma]: with GDP as a measure itself. One of the things we agreed on, and one of the things which
[Amit Varma]: was debated when the GDP was first mooted was should it include government spending
[Amit Varma]: in it or not. And because you know, it was a measure implemented just before the Second
[Amit Varma]: World War, the decision that was taken, if I remember correctly, against the advice of
[Amit Varma]: Simon Kuznets, who in a sense was the father of the GDP, was that, no, let's include government
[Amit Varma]: spending in it. But the problem with that is that if the GDP is being used as a measure
[Amit Varma]: of economic growth, that is an incentive for the government in power to spend more because
[Amit Varma]: all that spend gets counted. And it may be ineffective spending, it may even be destructive
[Amit Varma]: spending. You know, like you would actually, you know, the GDP would grow if you simply,
[Amit Varma]: you know, build bridges and blew them up and just reiterated that forever, the GDP would
[Amit Varma]: keep growing. And what has happened? And like, do you therefore feel a need to pass these
[Amit Varma]: numbers more closely, especially the GDP and say, okay, how much of this is just government
[Amit Varma]: spending? And how much of this is society itself?
[Guest]: Okay, you know, so there are two answers to this question. One is, given the unreliability
[Guest]: of the GDP numbers since January 2015, when we moved on to a new method, a simple way
[Guest]: to get around that is to look at a broad set of economic indicators. Now, while those indicators
[Guest]: may not give you this one number to come to a conclusion, like, you know, GDP does, it
[Guest]: gives you a better feel of the way the overall economy is headed. So, I'll substantiate this
[Guest]: with an example. So, sometime in late March, I think early April, not late March, I wrote
[Guest]: this piece for the Mint, wherein I said that India is getting into a consumption slowdown,
[Guest]: okay. And so, when I said this, a lot of people didn't buy it, but then that's that's a different
[Guest]: story for another day. But, you know, the way I caught it was simply because, you know,
[Guest]: I looked at car sales, I looked at scooter sales, motorcycle sales, moped sales, tractor
[Guest]: sales and commercial vehicle sales. So, six kinds of vehicle sales for different sections
[Guest]: of the society. So, car sales, a very urban phenomenon, motorcycle sales, both rural and
[Guest]: urban. Scooter sales, primarily more urban, more women. Moped, obviously, you know, for
[Guest]: people who cannot buy bikes and scooters. Tractor sales, rural rich. And commercial
[Guest]: vehicle sales, basically, you know, a good indicator of whether investment is happening
[Guest]: in the economy or not. So, all the six indicators had fallen, okay. And this hadn't happened
[Guest]: in five years. I mean, I had data for five years, it may not have happened even beyond
[Guest]: that. So, what that told me was that there's something which is not right. Now, the GDP
[Guest]: data would have never caught on to something like this, right. So, that's one part. So,
[Guest]: you have to obviously, you know, if you want to do serious economic analysis, you can't
[Guest]: rely on just one indicator, you have to look at multiple indicators. You have to look at
[Guest]: government indicators, you have to look at private indicators, you have to look at theoretical
[Guest]: constructs like the GDP is like the inflation is and you also have to look at high frequency,
[Guest]: you know, economic indicators like car sales, and two wheeler sales and so on. So, that's
[Guest]: one part of it. The second part is government spending. So, one exercise which I always
[Guest]: carry out and that again has helped me quite a lot in getting the, you know, the economic
[Guest]: scene right is, see, GDP has four constituents, right. Primarily, you have consumption expenditure,
[Guest]: which is the major part of the Indian economy, with close to around 58-59%. Then you have
[Guest]: investment, which is down to around 28%, 28-29%. Then you have government expenditure, which
[Guest]: varies anywhere from 8 to 12%. Now, it's like close to 13%. And you have net exports, which
[Guest]: is exports minus imports and is negative in the Indian case. So, a good thing to do while
[Guest]: analysing GDP numbers is to just get rid of government expenditure, okay. Subtract that
[Guest]: government expenditure from the overall GDP number. And what you get is non-government
[Guest]: GDP. I mean, you can call it private GDP, you can call it whatever you want to, but
[Guest]: or actual GDP, or as Kuznets GDP, because that's how he would have made it. That's how
[Guest]: he had imagined it. That's how he wanted it. So, if you look at that number, that gives
[Guest]: you a better indication. So, like, if you look at the first six months of 2019-20, the
[Guest]: GDP growth is 4.8%, whereas the non-government GDP growth is 3.8%. Wow, that's a big difference
[Guest]: is 100 basis points. And that brings me to the point that I try making all the time,
[Guest]: but nobody really seems to get it is. So, you know, whenever an economy is in trouble
[Guest]: and not just Indian economy, economists want the government to spend more money. I mean,
[Guest]: this is something that comes from John Maynard Keynes. But what Keynes had said, and I mean,
[Guest]: obviously, I mean, I call it the bastardization of Keynes. Keynes had essentially called for
[Guest]: savings during good time, and then spending that money in bad time. Now, obviously, no
[Guest]: government saves money. I mean, all of them run a fiscal deficit. So, now, if you look
[Guest]: at data for the last three years, the growth in the Indian economy has been driven largely
[Guest]: by government expenditure. So, the government expenditure in 17-18 increased by around 15%.
[Guest]: And these are real GDP growth numbers not, you know, adjusted for inflation. So, government
[Guest]: expenditure went up by 15% in 17-18, around 9.3, 9.4% in 18-19. And in 19-20, I think,
[Guest]: in the first six months, it's grown by 12.7%. So, the point is, you know, it's not like
[Guest]: so the government is already spending a lot of money. And that has been driving the GDP
[Guest]: growth number. I mean, as I said, if you take out government expenditure from the GDP, the
[Guest]: growth this year is 100 basis points lower. Now, the question that no one seems to be
[Guest]: asking is, and I also don't have a sort of a correct answer for this is that, where is
[Guest]: this money going? Right? Because if they're spending this money, it has to go somewhere,
[Guest]: you'd want to see some of it come back in the economy and create some kind of, so where
[Guest]: is this money going? Now, I have a sort of a theory on it. And so, a lot of this money
[Guest]: essentially is going towards buying rice and wheat, you know, which the Food Corporation
[Guest]: of India buys and distributes through the public distribution system. But if you look
[Guest]: at FCI data, you will realise that the organisation stores much more rice and wheat than is required.
[Guest]: So, in that way, we're basically buying rice and wheat from large farmers, giving them
[Guest]: that money. And then that rice and wheat is essentially rotting in the go downs of FCI.
[Amit Varma]: Because the purpose of buying them was not to feed people, but to just to buy that money,
[Guest]: just to buy that. Now, imagine that a few years back, I had done this calculation, and
[Guest]: I'm not sure whether if the number is still that, but the broader theory is still right.
[Guest]: And I'd found that around the excess stocks with Food Corporation of India, 80,000 crore
[Guest]: rupees worth of excess rice and wheat were lying in the go downs of FCI. I mean, this
[Guest]: is when you had accounted for the strategic reserve as well that every nation needs to
[Guest]: maintain. So, now imagine that 80,000 crore rupees going somewhere else. And, you know,
[Guest]: let's say it just goes towards building four lane highway.
[Amit Varma]: Or it's raised in the pockets of customers who it was whatever I mean, I mean, I'm even
[Amit Varma]: okay with the four lane highway, you know, in this recent speech that you made in Bangalore,
[Amit Varma]: you gave an illustration of how high the opportunity cost of this sort of money can be. And you
[Amit Varma]: use four lane highways.
[Guest]: Yeah, so that four lane highway example was from Vijay Kelkar and Ajay Shah's book, the
[Amit Varma]: new book, In Service of the Republic. I recorded with them last week, but that episode will
[Amit Varma]: be coming out after this one that will release on Jan 6, incredible book, it's a masterpiece
[Guest]: and great episode and you should read it. So anyway, so the Mr. Kelkar and Mr. Shah
[Guest]: point out that it costs rupees 1 lakh crore to build a 10,000 kilometre four lane highway.
[Guest]: Okay. Now, so with around 80,000 crore of excess rice and wheat with FCI, you basically
[Guest]: lost out on around 8000 kilometres of a four lane highway. Now, the example I used in the
[Guest]: speech was slightly different. I mean, I had compared four lane highways with the amount
[Guest]: the total amount of money that the government has been spending in order to recapitalize
[Guest]: public sector banks and to keep them going in the last few years. So between 1718, 1819
[Guest]: and 1920, the government would have ended up spending close to 270,000 crores to keep
[Guest]: these banks going. So which basically means 27,000 kilometres of four lane highways,
[Amit Varma]: which has massive what economists would call massive positive externalities on the economy
[Guest]: because you exactly you know, I mean, this does not mean that you let go of all public
[Guest]: sector banks and allow them to go bust. But at the same time, there is no need for the
[Guest]: government to be you know, running banks like Dena Bank and Indian Overseas Bank and United
[Guest]: Bank. You know, I mean, some of these banks have now been merged away. No, and in fact,
[Amit Varma]: you know, like when we think of government spending, I'd like people to think along two
[Amit Varma]: lines. One is beyond the obvious point one is just a simple moral cost of government
[Amit Varma]: money itself. Every rupee that the government has is coerced from someone that carries a
[Amit Varma]: moral cost, the person it is coerced from, which is some taxpayer who is buying a bar
[Amit Varma]: of soap or salt or whatever, that taxpayer could have found an alternative use for it,
[Amit Varma]: which would have contributed to their welfare. And surely which they would know more about
[Amit Varma]: than you would that's that's one.
[Guest]: Let me just take this forward. So where is this money to recapitalize government banks
[Guest]: coming from? It's been coming from the excise duty that we pay on petrol and diesel. Okay.
[Guest]: So in that way, every petrol and diesel buyer in India direct or indirect, I mean, indirectly,
[Guest]: we all buy petrol and diesel, right? Even though we may not have vehicles, but let's
[Guest]: say we go to buy, you know, vegetables somewhere. So that cost of transport is built into the
[Guest]: price of that vegetable, right? So indirectly, all of us are essentially paying a sort of
[Guest]: a premium. Every time you know, we buy anything to bail out the public sector banks in India
[Guest]: now. So there's another angle to it. Now the angle is, India produces very little of the
[Guest]: oil that it consumes. Okay, we import close to 85% of the oil now. And at the same time,
[Guest]: you know, our exports have sort of fallen over the years. So one of the things that
[Guest]: people regularly talk about, and especially when it comes to, you know, low value exports,
[Guest]: in order to get them going, you need to let the rupee depreciate. The problem with letting
[Guest]: the rupee depreciate is the moment you let the rupee depreciate, your petrol and diesel
[Guest]: prices start to go up. Okay. Now, one way of ensuring that the petrol and diesel prices
[Guest]: wouldn't go up is by cutting down the excise duty on it. But the moment you cut excise
[Guest]: duty on it, how do you finance the recapitalization of public sector banks? So the moral of the
[Guest]: story is that I mean, the direct effects in economics are very, very obvious. But it's
[Guest]: the indirect effects, which actually hurt the economy more.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I would say that there's no moral in the story. There's an immoral in the story.
[Amit Varma]: To continue with sort of the two part point I was making very quickly about government
[Amit Varma]: spending is one, of course, that all government spending carries a moral cost because of the
[Amit Varma]: coercive effect of acquiring that money, which is why whatever you which doesn't mean that
[Amit Varma]: government should not exist, we need it. But before we needed to protect our rights to
[Amit Varma]: begin with, but before you recommend any kind of government spending on anything, you have
[Amit Varma]: to firstly justify that moral cost. Now, assuming that you do that, the next step that then
[Amit Varma]: comes is you have to think about the opportunity cost of that spending. Like you just gave
[Amit Varma]: a great example of it Vivek, when you spoke about how the 8000 kilometres of four lane
[Amit Varma]: National Highway, but essentially, the opportunity cost can be anything if the money just stayed
[Amit Varma]: with the people it was coerced from, in the name of taxes, they would spend it in their
[Amit Varma]: own lives, it would be their consumption. That is also a cost, there is also a crowding
[Amit Varma]: out effect of such money, and various kinds of indirect effects as you know, of which,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you just give one excellent sort of example. So, you know, like you just said,
[Amit Varma]: in March, you wrote this piece about how there's a consumption crisis and nobody believed you.
[Amit Varma]: In August, I recorded an episode with our friend Mohit Satyanand on, I mean, the episode
[Amit Varma]: was called to economic crisis 2008 and 2019. And at that point, people were still in denial
[Amit Varma]: that we are in a crisis. To some extent, but I think there's a slightly greater awareness
[Amit Varma]: that higher crisis.
[Guest]: Yeah, but now the spin is that it's not a structural thing. And, you know, is there
[Guest]: something to that? I mean, there'll always be something to that. But, you know, it's
[Guest]: not just because of that. I mean, so there's a very long answer to this question. And I
[Guest]: think there are two answers. So the first part, where the global excuse has been used
[Guest]: over and over again is essentially when it comes to our exports. And, you know, when
[Guest]: it comes to exports, the exports of India have sort of fallen from around 25% of the
[Guest]: GDP in 2011-12 to around 19.7% in 2018-19. Now, you know, as I keep saying over and over
[Guest]: again, you know, no country in the history of economic development has gone from being
[Guest]: a developing country to becoming a developed country without a successful export sector.
[Guest]: Okay. I mean, maybe India has some new model brewing, but at least it's not happened up
[Guest]: until now.
[Guest]: And also, I mean, if you look at our two previous growth spurts between 92-97 and 2003 and 2011,
[Guest]: that was, I mean, I wouldn't say largely driven by the export sector, but the export sector
[Guest]: played a very important role in it. Also, the export sector tends to create a lot of
[Guest]: jobs for what we call the MSMEs, you know, micro, small and medium enterprises, which
[Guest]: have traditionally provided around 35-40% of goods exports. So, it's very, so, you know,
[Guest]: so it creates a lot of economic growth. Also, within the export sector, sectors like textile,
[Guest]: okay. So, textile is a very important sector because it creates jobs for women. And especially
[Guest]: given the fact that our female labour force participation rate has fallen dramatically
[Guest]: over the years, where, which basically means that lesser and lesser women who are a part
[Guest]: of the workforce are actually going out and working. Now, the excuse that has been offered
[Guest]: in case of the export sector is that, no boss, it's a global phenomenon and blah, blah, blah.
[Guest]: But that's not true. So, I mean, so recently, Dr. Shankar Acharya, who, you know, he's
[Guest]: a senior economist and a former chief economic advisor, he wrote in a column in the Business
[Guest]: Standard and I quote, so between 2011 and 2018, India's goods exports increased by only
[Guest]: 8%, okay. In sharp contrast, Vietnam's exports grew by 154%, Cambodia's by 114%, Myanmar's
[Guest]: by 82%, Bangladesh's by 61%, the Philippines by 40%, and even China on such a large base
[Guest]: by 31%. So, obviously, what this tells you is that our export sector has been unable
[Guest]: to compete internationally. And that's the long and the short of it. I mean, you know,
[Guest]: obviously, you know, the global slowdown has some sort of a impact, but largely our exports
[Guest]: have slowed down because we are unable to compete internationally. And, you know, I
[Guest]: mean, to compete internationally, I mean, this is very, very obvious and cliched and
[Guest]: has been said over and over again, reforms are required on the land, labor, capital,
[Amit Varma]: and tax front.
[Guest]: Which many hoped in 2014 that Modi would finally do, but he hasn't.
[Guest]: Except for, you know, reducing corporate income tax rates. Now, even, you know, for competing
[Guest]: within the country, the entrepreneurs need to pay a fair price for electricity and freight.
[Guest]: Now, the cost of cheap electricity right now in India for farmers is borne by the industry.
[Guest]: Along similar lines, railway passengers are subsidized at the cost of freight. The taxes
[Guest]: on aviation fuel have ensured that air cargo rates in India are one of the highest in the
[Guest]: world. So, I mean, these are fundamental anomalies which need to be set right, and they cannot
[Guest]: be set right overnight. And on top of this, we have a GST services tax system, which is
[Guest]: in a mess. Now, in fact, Kelkar and Shah have a very interesting point in the book where
[Guest]: they say that 80% of countries which introduced the GST after 1995 have opted for a single
[Guest]: rate GST. And this is a fundamental point which our lawmakers do not seem to get. I
[Guest]: mean, you know, we are still stuck in sin goods and it's not, you know, it's about the
[Guest]: overall simplicity of the system. So, I can understand two rates, but the current, you
[Guest]: know, paraphernalia is, in fact, now we have a funny situation wherein the GST on inputs,
[Guest]: a lot of inputs is greater than the GST on the final consumption good. So, because of
[Guest]: that, a lot of companies are getting refunds. And so, it tells you this is the problem of
[Guest]: launching a system, you know, and wanting to give a bhashan at midnight and claiming
[Guest]: that it's a big victory without really planning for it properly.
[Amit Varma]: And unless someone say that, oh, this is in hindsight that we know the problems people
[Amit Varma]: have been working on. Exactly. So, the truth is that, out of the many episodes I have done
[Amit Varma]: on GST on the scene and the unseen, the first one was before GST was implemented with our
[Amit Varma]: good friend Devanshu Dutta and Devanshu identified exactly the problems that have eventually
[Amit Varma]: turned out to be problems. Everything was foreseen, not just by Devanshu and me, but
[Amit Varma]: by all good economists. But this government, of course, does not value expertise as we
[Amit Varma]: have found out again and again. Moving on from this, you know, another sort of very
[Amit Varma]: interesting point that you made in your speech and that harks back to a book that both of
[Amit Varma]: us have been reading and talking about, Narrative Economics by Schiller, is about how the mentality
[Amit Varma]: of consumers can lead to vicious cycles in the economy which just keep it going more
[Amit Varma]: and more further down. And you've used a historical analogy of this with the Great
[Amit Varma]: Depression of 1929. Can you can you elaborate a bit on that?
[Guest]: Sure. Before I talk about narrative economics, I think Robert Schiller is this one economist
[Guest]: who gets these broad predictions right. I mean, very few economists get, you know, as
[Guest]: the old joke goes that economists predicted nine out of the last five recessions. So Schiller
[Guest]: got the 2000 stock market bubble right and even got the real estate bubble of 2008. Right.
[Guest]: So in narrative economics, he basically sort of the core point of the book is that how
[Guest]: the narratives that human beings create in their heads and in their lives, essentially
[Guest]: end up impacting the overall economy. So the example he gives is that of the Great Depression
[Guest]: of 1929. And I'll quote him. He says that in the four years after 1929, GDP per cent,
[Guest]: which is per capita income, went down by a catastrophic 20 percent. It's not called the
[Guest]: Great Depression for nothing. But at the same time, the sales of new cars of by the Ford
[Guest]: Motor Company fell by 86 percent. So per capita income went down by 20 percent, but car sales
[Guest]: went down by 86 percent. Obviously, there was a disproportionate impact on car sales.
[Guest]: Now, the question is, why did that happen? Now, you know, during the Great Depression,
[Guest]: close to 25 percent of the American labor force lost its jobs. They became unemployed.
[Guest]: The absolute number was around 13 million. Now, what happened was what this told you
[Guest]: was that everyone knew someone else, you know, someone in the family, some close friend or
[Guest]: a relative who had lost a job. So this created what we can call the psychology of the slowdown.
[Guest]: Right. So the bigger problem during the Great Depression was not I mean, obviously, you
[Guest]: know, people who lost their jobs had a problem. But the bigger problem in the minds of people
[Guest]: was the fear of losing a job and not being able to find another one. OK, because everyone
[Guest]: knew someone who had lost a job and was just sitting at home and doing nothing. And this
[Guest]: started to influence their consumption decisions. So like Schiller writes, and I quote him,
[Guest]: some people postponed buying a car or other major consumer items and which led to a loss
[Guest]: of jobs in the auto and consumer products industries, which led to more people postponement,
[Guest]: which led to a second round of job losses, and so on for several years. Now, so it essentially,
[Guest]: you know, the psychology of the slowdown had set gotten into the minds of people. And that
[Guest]: created a bigger problem over the years. So what happens is a lot of people talk about
[Guest]: this in a very, you know, sort of a nondescript manner where they say, oh, it's all in the
[Guest]: mind. I mean, boss, when it gets into the mind, it becomes a bigger problem than the
[Amit Varma]: actual problem. And also the thing to note here is that it's not that they were worried
[Amit Varma]: about nothing. It's not like a tulip bubble or something like that. They had reason to
[Amit Varma]: be worried the economy was doing badly. But these are sort of the ripple effects of that
[Amit Varma]: worry, where they decide that, okay, things are going bad, my cousin is out of a job,
[Amit Varma]: God knows how long this will go on. I had better chill out a little bit and, you know,
[Guest]: cut back on the lifestyle. And that creates a vicious cycle. And so what that does is,
[Guest]: you know, when the consumer confidence goes down, the business confidence also falls very,
[Guest]: very quickly. So it's like, you know, like, Mr. Modi recently made a speech, I think,
[Guest]: at the 100 years of Asocham, which is a business lobby, and asked the industry to invest. Now,
[Guest]: the problem is, you know, I mean, you can ask the industry to invest, but the industry
[Guest]: is not there to, you know, for social service, right? So the industry will invest when people
[Guest]: will consume, because when they put money into something, they're looking for a certain
[Guest]: rate of return, which is higher than their cost of capital. I mean, the capital may be
[Guest]: equity, it may be debt. And in a scenario where the consumers are not interested in
[Guest]: consumption in the same way as they were in the past, expecting industry to invest is
[Guest]: problematic. I mean, there is there's a problem with that argument. I mean, as a government,
[Guest]: you can only sort of set a series of reforms in place and encourage the industry to invest.
[Guest]: Now, whether the industry invests or not is, you know, depends on the industry when the
[Guest]: government cannot do much about it. So anyway, so once the consumer confidence goes down,
[Guest]: the business confidence also goes down very, very quickly. And when the business confidence
[Guest]: goes down, you know, tax collection becomes a problem, which is exactly how things are
[Guest]: playing out in India. I mean, if you look at the I mean, I have data for the first seven
[Guest]: months, I remember the tax collection, the gross tax revenue of the government has gone
[Guest]: up by around 1.5, 1.6%. Whereas in the budget, it is assumed to go by 18%. So that tells
[Guest]: you, I mean, if there is one data point that you need to look at, to sort of convince yourself
[Guest]: that there is an economic slowdown, this is it, because this is government data. And it
[Guest]: is a high frequency economic indicator published every month. It's not a theoretical construct
[Guest]: like the GDP is. So in this scenario, and obviously, you know, all of these points are
[Guest]: understood by the politicians of the day. Now, in 1929, what happened was that the American
[Guest]: President Calvin Coolidge tried to talk up the economy by, you know, saying things like
[Guest]: all is well, and you know, the stock market is doing well, and stuff like that. So, you
[Guest]: know, you had public officials, businessmen, journalists, all trying to talk up the economy.
[Guest]: And there is this, again, there's this something that Schiller writes in his book. And he says
[Guest]: that this led one observer to quit because everyone was being so positive about the entire
[Guest]: thing. Unfortunately, there appears a strong tendency among writers on business subjects
[Guest]: to put out nothing but optimistic statements, and to avoid all discussion that might be
[Guest]: construed as pessimism. I mean, I can vouch for the fact that, you know, one of the leading
[Guest]: business dailies in the country, or rather the leading business daily in the country
[Guest]: operates exactly like this. So their feeling is that if we keep saying all is well, ultimately,
[Guest]: all will become well. So because they believe they're so influential. So now, if you sort
[Guest]: of look at it, you know, if you compare this to what has been happening in India, the situation
[Guest]: is slightly similar, obviously, we are not in a depression, technically, we are not even
[Guest]: in a recession. Recession is when the economy contracts for two consecutive quarters. So
[Guest]: we are growing at a slower rate than we were in the past. So we are a part of a slowdown,
[Guest]: or what former RBI Governor Raghuram Rajan called a growth recession. So the moment he
[Guest]: called it a growth recession, you know, a few smart people on Twitter commented, how
[Guest]: can the words growth and recession be used one after the other, obviously, they do not
[Guest]: understand that, you know, economists have terms for various situations. This is a jargon
[Guest]: which Rajan was using. And growth recession is essentially a situation where economic
[Guest]: growth is slow. But the economy is in contracting, to be called a technical recession.
[Guest]: So basically, your growth is in recession in the sense what was growing at 7% that became
[Guest]: 5, became 3, that's in the growth rate is in recession.
[Guest]: At the same time, the unemployment is going up. So anyway, so we are in a growth, you
[Guest]: can call it a growth recession. I think Arvind Subramanian has called it a growth slowdown
[Guest]: or something like that, you know, we can keep arguing on the name, but that's not important.
[Guest]: Now, you know, even in India, you know, our ministers or policymakers, government, journalists,
[Guest]: television channels, have all tried to talk up the economy. Now, I think my, the statement
[Guest]: which obviously became most famous was the one that Nirmala Sitharaman, wherein she said,
[Guest]: the finance minister, she said that, you know, car sales have fallen because millennials
[Guest]: are buying Uber and Ola. I think for a finance minister of a country as big as India is to
[Guest]: make such a juvenile statement was sad. And this is like, you know, the government has
[Guest]: access to, you know, so many people in the Indian Economic Service, it has access to
[Guest]: so many think tanks. If such a statement was to be made, you know, there had to be some
[Guest]: research evidence backing it up. Okay. Also, it's like, you know, millennials have been
[Guest]: around, the poor guys keep getting blamed for everything, but they have been around
[Guest]: for a while now, right? And so have Uber and Ola. So it's not like millennials were not
[Guest]: there in 2014, 15, 16, 17 and 18. And Uber and Ola was also there. So why was it that
[Guest]: millennials stopped buying cars because of Uber and Ola only in 2019? Right? I mean,
[Guest]: so there are basic logical holes in what the minister said.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, as a tangent, you know, Vivek, I think we have to confess that even people
[Amit Varma]: in our 40s, like we have kind of given millennials too much of a bad rap, as we are finding out
[Amit Varma]: over the last few days with these spirited protests across the country being led by millennials
[Amit Varma]: fighting for our idea of India. You know, there's actually a lot more reason to have
[Guest]: hope from this generation than there is.
[Guest]: No, I mean, so I always, I've always said this, that the next generation is smarter.
[Guest]: And I mean, given that I keep talking to students all the while, I think there is nothing wrong
[Guest]: with them. I mean, this is I mean, they may have a different attitude towards life.
[Guest]: They are smarter because they invite you to gift talks.
[Guest]: No, I mean, so it's not, it's not like that. So I mean, so you can see you can make out
[Guest]: the smartness of a group by the kind of questions they ask you, right? And so everywhere I go,
[Guest]: and I mean, I talk to millennials, I think there's nothing, I mean, wrong with them.
[Guest]: I mean, they may have a different approach to life, they may have a different approach
[Guest]: to learning, like one of the beautiful things that I sort of learnt at the IIM in Vishakhapatnam
[Guest]: recently, where I had gone to talk, where the professor just said he's Vivek Kaul.
[Guest]: And he said, I won't introduce you because these guys have already googled you and they've
[Guest]: seen your YouTube videos. And, and I was like, yeah, I mean, this is how this generation
[Guest]: operates. And otherwise, what would have happened is in any other scenario, he would have introduced
[Guest]: me for five, seven minutes, and then I would have had to crack a joke. And, and we lost
[Guest]: the first 10 minutes of the class here, within the first minute, I was talking what I had
[Guest]: gone there for. So they had done their homework, it was just done in a different way, wherein,
[Guest]: you know, in our generation would have probably dug up, read a book or whatever these guys
[Guest]: are, you know, they have their ways. So, so getting back to what we were talking about,
[Guest]: so other than Nirmala Sitharaman, the other, you know, the statement that was made was
[Guest]: by Ravi Shankar Prasad. And he said that on 2nd October, people spend 120 crores watching
[Guest]: three movies, Joker, War, and Saira, Narasimha Reddy, Chiranjeevi's big release. And he said,
[Guest]: so where is the slowdown? Okay. Now, you know, in a country like India, whipping up a big
[Guest]: number is never really a, you know, it's not, it's not a problem at all. But you also have
[Guest]: to see where that big number fits into the overall scheme of things. So if you look at
[Guest]: the projected GDP of India during for 2019-20, I mean, this is the GDP, which is on which
[Guest]: all the calculations have happened in the budget, which was presented in February last
[Guest]: February this year, not last year, we are not yet into 2020. So the GDP forecast is
[Guest]: around 211 lakh crore, okay. Private consumption is around 58-59% of the GDP. So at 59%, I
[Guest]: think it works out to around at 125 lakh crore, okay. So if you divide that 125 lakh crore
[Guest]: by 365 days, so the average consumption expenditure on any given day in India is around
[Guest]: 34,250 crore, which obviously will be a little higher on a day like October 2, because it's
[Guest]: a holiday, long weekend, and people go out and spend on these opportunities. So now imagine
[Guest]: 120 crore as a part of 34,250 crore, which Indians anyway, spend on a given day. So the
[Guest]: percentage is around 0.35%. So, you know, you have to look at the broader context before
[Guest]: you go out and say things. And the funny part was, he later said that I have withdrawn my
[Guest]: statement. Now, how do you this is something I've never understood. How do you withdraw
[Guest]: something you have already said, you can either say, I stand by my statement, or you can say
[Amit Varma]: I was wrong. How do you withdraw it?
[Guest]: Because if reality changes, suddenly, you never said it to begin with, I can, you know,
[Guest]: I can understand once you've said it, and you realize it's okay. I mean, we all say
[Guest]: things which we regret. I mean, all that what that requires is, all you have to say I was
[Guest]: wrong. That's it. I mean, how do you withdraw that you can't withdraw that, right? So, and
[Guest]: so then, you know, so there are these points which keep getting made, wherein someone picks
[Guest]: up a part of the whole, and then throws that number at you and then asks you this question,
[Guest]: where is the slowdown? So, the other example that I love giving is on cars. And there are
[Guest]: these two cars, car companies, I should say, which are doing very well this year. One is
[Guest]: the Korean company Kia Motors, and then I think the other is MG Hector. So, these cars,
[Guest]: companies have sold a few 1000 cars. And every time you say there is a slowdown, they say,
[Guest]: but what about Kia Motors? So, I did a very rough calculation. And so,
[Guest]: I'll sort of read out these numbers. Kia Motors has sold 40,845 units this year. By this year,
[Guest]: I mean April to November. MG Hector has sold 11,401 units. This is between April and November.
[Guest]: In total, 11.49 lakh cars have been sold this year. So, Kia Motors and MG Hector form only
[Guest]: 4.5% of the total cars sold. The total car sales during the same period in 2018, stood
[Guest]: at 15.35 lakh. So, from 15.35 lakh, we have fallen to 11.49 lakh, which is a drop of 25%.
[Guest]: So, so clearly, there is a, you know, I mean, you can always take one data point and you
[Guest]: can cherry pick and yeah, and see, it's like the example I give these days is let's say
[Guest]: India grows at 10%. I mean, let's say, I'm assuming here. Now, obviously, there will
[Guest]: be parts of India, like let's say, Karnataka. Karnataka may grow at 15%. But Bihar might
[Guest]: go at 4%. So, that does not mean that there is no problem in just because India and Karnataka
[Guest]: are growing at a higher rate does not mean there's no problem in Bihar, right?
[Amit Varma]: And in this case, just because a small part of the whole is doing well doesn't mean the
[Guest]: whole is doing well. So, this is like the other way around. So, yeah, I mean, so there
[Guest]: are a lot of these things, which are sort of, you know, where people throw numbers at
[Guest]: us, without, you know, really giving us the context. But you know, the interesting thing
[Amit Varma]: here is that their target audience doesn't want the context, of course, they want the
[Amit Varma]: impressive number they are learning through WhatsApp University, they want the impressive
[Amit Varma]: number by which they can feel that they have a good argument to defend whatever side of
[Amit Varma]: the argument they're on. You know, this is not a failing, restricted to one wing or the
[Amit Varma]: other. And big numbers, like you said, sort of sound good, you know, speaking of big numbers,
[Amit Varma]: you know, another sort of big number I came across recently was when I was on our favourite
[Amit Varma]: app, TikTok. Am I correct in saying it is our favourite app?
[Unknown]: Yeah, of course. I love TikTok.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so TikTok. So, I was on TikTok. And I had, of course, introduced our good friend
[Amit Varma]: Mohit Satyanand and his wife Premi to TikTok. So, I saw a statistic I thought would interest
[Amit Varma]: them, which was that there were literally hundreds of videos on onions, which were parodying
[Amit Varma]: the government. I mean, TikTok was a centre of dissent in India. And the total number
[Amit Varma]: of views for these videos was some 360 million. So, I instantly took a screenshot and I send
[Amit Varma]: it to Mohit and Mohit was amazed. He was like, Oh, my God, this means like one view for everyone
[Amit Varma]: in every four Indians. And this is mind blowing. And this is amazing. And then I scroll down
[Amit Varma]: and there is another hashtag, some backbenchers hashtag or whatever, which had 6.4 billion
[Amit Varma]: views. I don't know how that is even possible given our population.
[Guest]: So, that's the whole thing. So, if you go on to YouTube now, you'll realise that a lot
[Guest]: of songs in different Indian languages, not Hindi, okay, have huge number of hits. So,
[Guest]: there are Punjabi songs, I think there's one Punjabi song, which I don't recall the name
[Guest]: right now, which has close to a billion, which I mean, obviously, a lot of people watch them
[Guest]: again and again. What is also happening here is that because YouTube pays you, you know,
[Guest]: the business model is such that the more hits you have, the more money you make. I'm sure
[Guest]: there are bots or something which are going on. There was this controversy also recently
[Guest]: with Badshah on YouTube, wherein YouTube, I think refused to pay him because I mean,
[Guest]: you probably thought that there are bots which are driving up. No, the thing is, they have
[Amit Varma]: software to detect bots. But there was this interesting viral video, which, you know,
[Amit Varma]: was doing the rounds a few months ago, we showed this Chinese sort of clicking factory
[Amit Varma]: link clicking factory, where they just had, you know, 10s, if not hundreds of phones just
[Amit Varma]: lined up on the wall and a guy going from one to the other just clicking like on each
[Amit Varma]: of them like physically, so it's not a bot doing it. So, even if you have some bot detection
[Amit Varma]: software, this is a guy physically or not. Yes, cumbersome, but you know, the Chinese
[Amit Varma]: will do anything. And hey, guess what, the Indians won't even though we have cheaper
[Amit Varma]: labour, that's, you know, it's a business model we should be getting in. But where is
[Amit Varma]: our informal sector anymore? Let's now take a quick commercial break. And we'll come back
[Amit Varma]: shortly to actually talk about 2019. One of the great joys of doing the seen and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: is that it forces me to read a lot more than I used to. I was a voracious reader as a kid.
[Amit Varma]: But once I entered adulthood, I lost that habit. And it's an incredibly important habit.
[Amit Varma]: The more we read, the better we understand the world and the people around us. We make
[Amit Varma]: sense of the world through stories by connecting dots. And the more dots we have, the clearer
[Amit Varma]: our vision. Reading gives us those dots. I've been working hard in my reading habit. And
[Amit Varma]: now I invite you to join me. My new podcast, The Book Club by Amit Verma begins in early
[Amit Varma]: January exclusively on Storytel. This is a weekly show that I run for a year. Every week
[Amit Varma]: on The Book Club, I will recommend one book that I enjoy reading. And I will speak about
[Amit Varma]: what it brought to me and why you should read it. You can use my show to take random recommendations
[Amit Varma]: yourself or you can start a reading club of your own using my show as a starting point.
[Amit Varma]: I'll discuss all genres of fiction and nonfiction. And hopefully together, we can understand
[Amit Varma]: the world a little bit better. Coming soon, The Book Club by Amit Verma, only on Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with my good friend, Vivek Kaul,
[Amit Varma]: the Shah Rukh Khan of economics, the doomsayer of Twitter, about, you know, economics in
[Amit Varma]: India in 2019. And you know, one of the things I learned as a cricket journalist, because
[Amit Varma]: I started at Wisden and then Cricinfo and so on, is that look, everybody's watching
[Amit Varma]: the match and the basic commodity of the information, the news, what has happened, people know.
[Amit Varma]: So when you're writing about the match the next day, for example, you should have a lot
[Amit Varma]: of analysis and go deeper and have more color and all that because the bare facts everybody
[Amit Varma]: knows. But the thing is, you know, with the economy, I'm not sure if we even know the
[Amit Varma]: bare facts, because it is such a complex subject, and there is so much rhetoric around. So I'm
[Amit Varma]: actually going to ask you for the bare facts. How did our economy actually do in 2019? How
[Amit Varma]: does one sum it up? What is your match report?
[Guest]: I think this has been the worst year in many years. I think by far the worst year since
[Guest]: I would say 2004, 2005, or even before that. So basically, you know, what has happened
[Guest]: is that, I mean, as I've said before, the private consumption expenditure is by far
[Guest]: the biggest part of the Indian economy. And it constitutes around 58-59%. And the growth
[Guest]: in private consumption expenditure peaked way back in 2011-12, okay, you know, at 17.5%.
[Guest]: And after that, the private consumption expenditure growth has largely seen a downward trend.
[Guest]: But it has always managed to grow in double digits. And this has basically ensured that
[Guest]: India has continued to grow.
[Amit Varma]: And by private consumption, just to clarify, what you mean is people like you and me spending
[Guest]: money.
[Guest]: Spending something.
[Guest]: Movies.
[Guest]: Popcorn.
[Guest]: Pictures.
[Guest]: Cars.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: This is all private consumption. Now, in 2019-20, for the first time since 2004-05, the private
[Guest]: consumption growth has fallen into single digits, and it's been around close to 7%.
[Guest]: I mean, nominal 7, not adjusted for inflation. So, the question is, why has this happened?
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: The answer for this lies in the fact that our household savings and our net household
[Guest]: financial savings have been falling in the last few years. Now, what do I mean by this?
[Guest]: The net household financial savings are essentially, you know, fixed deposits, insurance, mutual
[Guest]: funds, small savings, etc., minus the liabilities that people have sort of accumulated over
[Guest]: the years.
[Guest]: So, the household financial savings peaked between 2008-09 and 2010-11, when they were
[Guest]: greater than 10% of the national disposable income in each of the three years. Okay. After
[Guest]: that, they have been falling and in 17-18, they reached a low of 6.5%.
[Guest]: And this has primarily happened because financial liabilities of people have been growing, which
[Guest]: basically means people have been borrowing more. Now, what does this tell us? It tells
[Guest]: us that the consumption growth, since it's peaked in 11-12, has been financed more and
[Guest]: more by people borrowing more. Okay. So, the borrowings have essentially continued to finance
[Guest]: our consumption in the last 7-8 years. And that story is now unravelling.
[Guest]: Now, other than looking at the
[Amit Varma]: By borrowing, do you, newbie question, do you include things like credit card?
[Guest]: Anything, you know, personal loans, so on, I mean, NBFC loans. And now, if you look at
[Guest]: overall household savings, they have also been falling over the years. Now, what that
[Guest]: tells you is that other than borrowing, a greater proportion of the income is being
[Guest]: spent towards consumption. So, which again explains why people are saving less and using
[Guest]: that money to consume more. Now, the question again is why are savings falling? Okay. And
[Guest]: the answer for that lies in the fact that our income growth has also slowed down in
[Guest]: the last few years. In fact, the per capita income growth peaked way back in 2010-11 at
[Guest]: 16.9%. And I think since 2014-15, the growth rate of income has been in single digits.
[Guest]: Okay. And if you look at the income tax data, it tells you that between assessment year
[Guest]: 12-13 and assessment year 18-19, salaried income has grown at just 4.5% per year. So,
[Guest]: what that tells you is that if you adjust for inflation, the salaried income has actually
[Guest]: come down. Rural wages for men, you know, sort of grew at 28% in 13-14. Since then,
[Guest]: they have grown in single digits, with the growth in 18-19 falling to just 3.8%.
[Guest]: Wow. And this is again nominal terms. If you take an inflation, it's gone down.
[Guest]: And all nominal. The same is true for the rural wages for women. So, basically, because
[Guest]: the income growth has slowed down, people have used a greater proportion of their income
[Guest]: to consume, because of which their savings have come down, and they have also borrowed
[Guest]: to consume more. Right. So, all this was essentially financing Indian consumption since the consumption
[Amit Varma]: growth peaked in 11-12.
[Amit Varma]: And do these falling savings then have an impact down the line on investments?
[Guest]: No. So, which is what I mean, I was coming to. So, basically, now, the question is, why
[Guest]: has the income not been growing? The income has not been growing primarily because if
[Guest]: you look at the investment to GDP ratio, that also has been falling over the years. So,
[Guest]: the investment to GDP ratio peaked in 2007-8 at 35.8%. And in the last few years, it's
[Guest]: varied between 28 and 29%. Now, just to give you a few data points, which essentially show
[Guest]: you how bad the situation is. In 2010-11, the new investment projects announced were
[Guest]: worth 25.7 lakh crore. In 18-19, this was down to 12.1 lakh crore or 46% of the earlier
[Guest]: year. During the first six months of 19-20, new investment projects worth just 2.04 lakh
[Guest]: crore have been announced. So, this tells you how bad the situation is on the investment
[Guest]: front. Now, this is a scarier number because announcements are okay. I mean, people announce
[Guest]: all kinds of things. When it comes to investment projects drop, the situation appears to be
[Guest]: even more grim. In 10-11, the investment projects worth 4.04 lakh crore had been dropped. This
[Guest]: jumped to 20.74 lakh crore in 18-19. During the first six months of 19-20, projects worth
[Guest]: rupees 7.9 lakh crore have already been dropped. So, basically, what has happened is that investments
[Guest]: haven't sort of grown at the rate they were expected to, because of which there has been
[Guest]: an impact on income growth, because of which there has been, you know, people have consumed
[Guest]: a greater part of their income, and they've also consumed by borrowing more, and because
[Guest]: of which our consumption growth sort of, you know, which should have slowed down dramatically
[Guest]: earlier did not slow down. And all this is now sort of coming together. Now, the problem
[Guest]: is you might ask that, you know, why are you saying this now and not in 2018? The problem
[Guest]: is that a lot of data in India is not available quickly enough. So, if you look at the financial
[Guest]: savings data numbers that I'm offering now, were not available back then. So, the numbers
[Guest]: were available only as of 15-16, and then 16-17. And the trend was not very obvious.
[Guest]: But once the 17-18 data came in, the trend became very, very obvious. So, basically,
[Guest]: you know, as our current chief economic advisor keeps saying, investment ultimately finances
[Guest]: consumption. Consumption can only finance consumption up to a certain extent, because
[Guest]: it is investment, which creates economic activity.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, that's the central point of the episode I did with Mohit Sityanand in August, which
[Amit Varma]: will be linked from the show notes.
[Guest]: So, one example I sort of, so in every city I speak, I mean, at least the bigger cities,
[Guest]: I give the example of that city. So, I was recently in Bangalore, and the example I gave
[Guest]: in Bangalore was of the IT industry in Bangalore, right? Now, when the first set of companies
[Guest]: came in, and they said, okay, let's establish something in Bangalore. So, Bangalore was
[Guest]: a sleepy pensioner's town three decades back, and now it's, you know, it's a global IT hub.
[Guest]: So, when the first set of companies came in, and they established, you know, their code
[Guest]: writing center or whatever, they hired people. Now, those people who were hired had to then
[Guest]: go look for housing, okay, right? And once they sort of, you know, rented their homes
[Guest]: or whatever, they had to furnish that home, right? Then they had to hire cooks, so on
[Guest]: and so forth, maids. And that's how the, you know, economic activity sort of created other
[Amit Varma]: economic activity.
[Guest]: Because the cooks will get a place to stay, they'll have some kind of furniture, they
[Guest]: will travel around.
[Guest]: So, if you look at, so, you know, many years back, I was at the Indian School of Business
[Guest]: in Hyderabad, and one researcher offered this very interesting data point. And he said,
[Guest]: every formal job in Bangalore creates six informal jobs around it. And, you know, to
[Guest]: the extent, I mean, look at the real estate boom in that city, I mean, it would have never
[Guest]: happened, right? I mean, and when a real estate boom happens, the kind of employment that
[Guest]: is created, especially for, you know, people who do not have specialized skills is mind
[Guest]: boggling, right? So, a similar thing has happened in Hyderabad, a similar thing has happened
[Guest]: in Pune, where economic activity has feeded on economic activity, which is already happening.
[Guest]: And at the heart of it is, I mean, you can call it investment, you can call it anything.
[Guest]: Basically, someone needs to start a business and employ people to run that business. So,
[Guest]: unless that happens, it's very difficult for consumption to continue to be robust. And
[Guest]: it is very difficult without consumption. If consumption is not robust, the economy
[Amit Varma]: cannot continue to grow at the same pace.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing to notice is starting a business is not a blind shot in the dark, someone deciding
[Amit Varma]: to do something for society by starting a business. There are incentives in play, he
[Amit Varma]: has a sense of the market, how much money people are willing to play. What you've just
[Amit Varma]: described is a virtuous cycle, that you have investment happening, it creates jobs and
[Amit Varma]: opportunities for many people who all consume and that consumption then makes industry prosper
[Amit Varma]: and they spend more and then therefore people are more to consume. And it's a virtuous cycle.
[Amit Varma]: What we are in now, as you also described eloquently before, this is a vicious cycle,
[Amit Varma]: where people are consuming less and less. And therefore, industry is growing worse and
[Amit Varma]: worse, and they are spending less and less. So, people are consuming less and less because
[Amit Varma]: they have less and less money. Now, the thing is, how did we get from that virtuous cycle
[Amit Varma]: to a vicious cycle? And what can be done to like, how does one get back out of this? What
[Amit Varma]: are the typical sort of things that you'd look at doing? I mean, I understand part of
[Amit Varma]: the problem is just diagnosing the situation properly, which hasn't really happened to
[Amit Varma]: that extent. And, you know, even within that there are so many fumblings. But how does
[Guest]: one move from one kind of cycle to another? I think I'll answer that. I think before that,
[Guest]: the other thing I wanted to sort of elaborate on was India's demographic dividend. Okay.
[Guest]: I think it's very, very important to talk about this. So, you know, the first time I
[Guest]: sort of encountered this term was sometime in 2006, 2007, when I used to be a journalist
[Guest]: covering personal finance for this newspaper called Daily News and Analysis, which shut
[Guest]: down sometime back. And I used to have to cover these new mutual fund, equity mutual
[Guest]: fund schemes being launched. Now, obviously, there was no difference between once, you
[Guest]: know, all the schemes were the same, you know, they'd probably go and buy stocks and make
[Guest]: money for the investors, hope to at least. So, all these press conferences used to have
[Guest]: a presentation made by a fund manager. And all the fund managers used to have what I
[Guest]: started calling the IDD slide, which is basically India's demographic dividend. Now, demographic
[Guest]: dividend is essentially a period of few decades in the, you know, in the life cycle of a country
[Guest]: where the workforce increases at a faster rate than the overall population. And this
[Guest]: happens primarily because the infant mortality rate over the years, which is basically the
[Guest]: number of babies who die before the age of one comes down dramatically. Now, as these
[Guest]: people enter the workforce and find jobs and you know, make money and spend that money,
[Guest]: the economy grows at a faster pace because of that millions of people get pulled out
[Guest]: of poverty. And it's happened in all the countries which have gone from being developing to becoming
[Guest]: developed countries have had, you know, demographic dividend play a role in it. Now, in India's
[Guest]: case, we were told back in 2006-7, that a million Indians were entering the workforce
[Guest]: every month, okay, which is around 1.2 crore a year. And this is when our female labor
[Guest]: participation rate is low. You know, if a majority of the women start entering the workforce,
[Guest]: this number could go up to at least 2 million a month, not 2 million a month, but around
[Guest]: 1.8, 1.9 million a month easily. So, now, so obviously, you know, there had to be, you
[Guest]: know, jobs had to be created for these people. But given the fact that, you know, investment
[Guest]: isn't really happening, the kind of jobs that had to be created for these people haven't
[Guest]: been created. And because of that, you know, now you have all this unemployment data coming
[Guest]: out, which is very, very scary. So, you know, you had the National Sample Survey's offices,
[Guest]: periodic labor force survey, and according to which the rate of unemployment among 15
[Guest]: to 29 year olds was at 17.4% in 17-18, having jumped from 5% in 11-12. Now, the Center for
[Guest]: Monitoring Indian Economy puts out more recent data, and they say that the rate of unemployment
[Guest]: in January 2017, among 15 to 29 year olds, 20 to 24 year olds, and 25 to 29 year olds
[Guest]: was 27.3%, 21.6%, and 8.7%. In November 2019, the rate was at 40.9%, 39.2%, and 10%. So,
[Guest]: there has been a huge jump. At the same time, the labor force participation rate has fallen.
[Guest]: So what that basically means is that a lot of people who could not find jobs have opted
[Guest]: out of the labor force. And even then, the rate of unemployment has gone up. I think
[Guest]: Dr. Ratan Roy, who is the boss man at NIPFP, if I remember correctly, made a very interesting
[Guest]: point in a recent interview. And I think this all of us should have this data point in our
[Guest]: heads. And this is coming from Dr. Roy, I mean, who's, you know, as nonpartisan as one
[Guest]: can get. Not from Dr. Debra Roy. I mean, we need to differentiate between our Roys and
[Amit Varma]: our Debra Roys.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, between the economists who still have some integrity and those who don't, if I may
[Guest]: put it plainly.
[Guest]: The number of young Indians without jobs, but also not looking for jobs. And additionally,
[Guest]: not in any institute for training or education has almost tripled in the last 10 years. It
[Guest]: was estimated to be at 3, 3.5 crore a decade ago. It's now believed to be 10 crore or more.
[Guest]: So if you remove the retired and those too young to work, this 10 crore constitutes a
[Guest]: very sizable section of the population of our workforce.
[Guest]: Now, you know, one thing that has happened because of this is, you know, if you look
[Guest]: at all the, or not all the, but large section of landowning castes in India, wanting reservations
[Guest]: in government jobs, this is a clear impact of that, okay, where our demographic dividend
[Amit Varma]: is not working.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this is, in fact, a dual problem, because the thing is that, for example, the
[Amit Varma]: Jat agitation, the Faryana, the Maratha agitations here and different agitations and different,
[Amit Varma]: the Partidar agitations of Gujarat, I have had occasion to refer to them in multiple
[Amit Varma]: episodes on multiple subjects, because they also reference, for example, a problem with
[Amit Varma]: agriculture, because, because people in agriculture are effectively trapped in agriculture.
[Amit Varma]: What really happens is that with every passing generation, the amount of land holding within
[Amit Varma]: a family keeps going down.
[Amit Varma]: Because if you have two kids, your land is halved, if you have three, it is one third
[Amit Varma]: and so on down the generations.
[Amit Varma]: And why you have so many landowning castes across the country, Jats, Partidars, Marathas,
[Amit Varma]: agitating for reservations in these numbers is because agriculture is simply not a way
[Amit Varma]: for them to make a living and they need an exit.
[Amit Varma]: And because our sort of industrial policies and our policies regarding land and labor
[Amit Varma]: still haven't been modernized, unfortunately, the sort of generation of jobs that should
[Amit Varma]: have led to this demographic explosion actually being a dividend simply hasn't happened.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, when we talk about you have 1 million people coming into the workforce every month,
[Amit Varma]: and therefore you need to provide jobs for them.
[Amit Varma]: Provide jobs is the loose way of putting it.
[Amit Varma]: The point is, it's no one's job to provide jobs, you know, a government is not going
[Amit Varma]: to provide jobs, it can only create the conditions in which the natural creativity and entrepreneurship
[Amit Varma]: of people can thrive.
[Amit Varma]: And then those industries will happen, those jobs will happen.
[Amit Varma]: The truth is that those conditions have never for the most part existed.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, you know, the 91 reforms did help a little bit in terms of liberalizing product markets,
[Amit Varma]: but not factor markets, not land, labor, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And we are feeling the effect of those fundamental structural reforms not being made because
[Amit Varma]: month after month, every month, more than 10 lakh people come into the workforce, and
[Amit Varma]: the jobs aren't there.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So the other impact of this now which is happening, and I think this is the next big dangerous
[Guest]: thing is state governments wanting to reserve jobs for locals.
[Guest]: So it's already, Andhra Pradesh has done it, the Maharashtra's new three party government
[Guest]: in Mumbai is talking about it.
[Guest]: Now, I think this is basically a race to the bottom and puts the entire idea of India at
[Guest]: stake.
[Guest]: You know, if we cannot even move around in the country to get a job, then you know, where
[Guest]: does that leave us?
[Guest]: Also, you know, this is also gets us into the touchy subject of migration, right?
[Guest]: Because within a country, people are bound to move from parts which have less economic
[Guest]: activity to parts which have more economic activity.
[Guest]: And migration is by far the quickest way of reducing inequality, okay.
[Guest]: So if that is not allowed to happen, and you know, it's it's a very tricky situation.
[Guest]: Now look at Andhra Pradesh, it's a new state, right?
[Guest]: I mean, and it needs a lot of investment.
[Guest]: So how do you get that investment?
[Guest]: I mean, companies come and establish factories and offices there.
[Guest]: Now, would you expect a private company to go to a state which insists on hiring local
[Guest]: labor?
[Guest]: Or would a company go to a state which lets you know, hire the best people available for
[Guest]: the job, right?
[Guest]: Now, so the point I was trying to make, you know, I think I said this somewhere in I think
[Guest]: in Bangalore only where that, you know, imagine if in the late 70s and early 80s, the people
[Guest]: who ran the IT policy of Karnataka, even if there was anything like that, I would have
[Guest]: said that only Karnatikas have to be hired, right?
[Guest]: Or only people who are local to let's say, Karnataka, I mean, they may not be Karnatikas
[Guest]: because Bangalore is full of Tamilians, as well, and even Telugus.
[Guest]: So would the IT companies have come to Bangalore and established as many, you know, companies
[Guest]: as they did, or even take the example that I remember here is when Indian School of Business
[Guest]: first came to India, or rather when the idea was mooted, it was supposed to be established
[Guest]: in Mumbai, what happened was that the Maharashtra government wanted 20% reservation or some
[Guest]: such number for the local population, which is an end Chandrababu, when I do saw this
[Guest]: as an opportunity, because Hyderabad had just started coming up at that point of time, and
[Guest]: ISB in Hyderabad would have been this trophy project, which would sort of attract a lot
[Guest]: of global attention, which it did.
[Guest]: And he just seized on to the opportunity and just, you know, and ISB ended up in Hyderabad.
[Guest]: So my point is that, you know, how will it will be interesting to see how will companies
[Guest]: react to this?
[Guest]: Also, how will politicians react to this, because it's very easy for a politician to
[Guest]: just say, okay, we'll reserve jobs for locals, you know, that again, I mean, it brings us
[Guest]: back to how you know, what we were talking before we came to the studio to record this
[Guest]: episode as to how governments and politicians like to put out simplistic things, right?
[Guest]: So okay, there are jobs are a problem, okay, we'll not let migrants come in.
[Guest]: But is that really the solution?
[Guest]: No, because ultimately, what you want is economic activity, right?
[Guest]: And when migrants come in, I mean, they do create economic activity, lots of it, in fact,
[Guest]: I mean, they spend money, they eat, they rent homes, they go out watch movies, in fact,
[Amit Varma]: Bombay, like all great cities in the world is a city built entirely by migrants.
[Amit Varma]: And I've in fact, had I had a great episode with Chinmay Tumbe on his book, India moving,
[Amit Varma]: which, by the way, I think is a great book, one of the most underrated books of the year,
[Amit Varma]: which talks about just internal migration without India and its effects.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to elaborate a bit on this question of simplistic narratives.
[Amit Varma]: And then come back to you with a question after that, which is that, I mean, what has
[Amit Varma]: always been the case, but what we've seen more of over the last few years, as populism
[Amit Varma]: has grown, is that these simplistic narratives, finding a certain popular validation, for
[Amit Varma]: example, one of the things that distinguish Trump from say, Hillary Clinton, when he was
[Amit Varma]: standing against her in 2016, was his use of powerful, simple narratives to explain
[Amit Varma]: the problems of the world.
[Amit Varma]: For example, he said that, why are there no jobs in middle America, two of the simplistic
[Amit Varma]: explanations he came up with, one, immigrants are coming and taking away your jobs.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, let's stop immigration, let's send the Mexicans back.
[Amit Varma]: And two, outsourcing is bad, your jobs are being shipped overseas.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, let's stop shipping jobs overseas.
[Amit Varma]: Now, both of these explanations are completely wrong.
[Amit Varma]: But both of these are very easy to understand and get behind in a rhetorical sense.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, you've pointed out how in our cities, people will often say, oh, there's a jobs
[Amit Varma]: problem.
[Amit Varma]: It's migrants are coming and messing it up.
[Amit Varma]: They are also a problem in the culture and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: Let's stop migrants.
[Amit Varma]: Let's give jobs to locals.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one simplistic narrative that I see coming up in the days to come, and Modi has
[Amit Varma]: alluded to it in his speeches, is the population problem, which is not really a problem in
[Amit Varma]: my view at all.
[Amit Varma]: But because you know, there is a jobs crisis, I expect him to blame it on our growing population
[Amit Varma]: and propose population control measures such as only two kids per family, which will of
[Amit Varma]: course, which he expects to hit Muslims disproportionately, because that is a rhetoric that they have more
[Amit Varma]: kids than Hindus do, which is not exactly true, though it is true that the poor have
[Amit Varma]: more kids than the rich do, and the Muslims tend to be disproportionately poor.
[Amit Varma]: Leaving all of that aside, I mean,
[Guest]: No, I just like to cut in there.
[Guest]: And in fact, you know, this this population thing, and it really, it's such a huge thing
[Guest]: in the minds of people, but it's not really true anymore.
[Guest]: Because if you look at the births for women, it has come down to around 2.3, okay, the
[Guest]: replacement rate is 2.1 globally, which basically means that for every 100 women, 210 children
[Guest]: need to be born to for the population to be the same.
[Guest]: Now, in Indian case, because the infant mortality rate is higher, our 2.3 is almost equal to
[Guest]: 2.1.
[Guest]: Now, so which basically means that our population will start stabilizing in a few decades.
[Guest]: And we have done it the right way.
[Guest]: We haven't done it the China way, wherein we have limited, you know, the number of kids.
[Guest]: And because of that, you know, China has this, you know, there are, you know, parents basically
[Guest]: want boys.
[Amit Varma]: I left two responses to that, and one of them is a disagreement.
[Amit Varma]: First response to that is even if it wasn't 2.3, if it was 2.8, or 2.9, or whatever, I
[Amit Varma]: don't care.
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, one of the basic fallacies that people tend to hold about economics and
[Amit Varma]: society is that more people are a bad thing.
[Amit Varma]: That is not the case.
[Amit Varma]: People are what the economist Julian Simon called the ultimate resource.
[Amit Varma]: People bring in more than they take out.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, a classic illustration of this is that look, all migration happens from rural
[Amit Varma]: areas to cities, from places which don't have so much population density to places of very
[Amit Varma]: high population density.
[Amit Varma]: The most prosperous parts of any country are its highly dense cities.
[Amit Varma]: Why do people migrate to them?
[Amit Varma]: Because more people means larger economic networks, more opportunities, better markets
[Amit Varma]: for whatever goods or services or talents that they might have.
[Amit Varma]: And you can point to say, a Bangladesh or an India which are poor countries and say,
[Amit Varma]: look at the population density.
[Amit Varma]: But you can also point to a Bahrain or a Monaco which have a greater population density and
[Amit Varma]: are far more prosperous.
[Amit Varma]: So in that sense, population isn't a problem at all and of all people, our current generation
[Amit Varma]: of leaders who grew up during emergency should realize that.
[Amit Varma]: My second point, which is a slight disagreement, is I don't think we've got here the right
[Amit Varma]: way.
[Guest]: I think, you know, we keep talking about China, but, you know, we keep talking about, you
[Amit Varma]: know, Sanjay Gandhi's forced Nazbandis, which happens in the tens of thousands during emergency,
[Amit Varma]: but it's actually those practices continue to the present day with throughout the country,
[Amit Varma]: rural government doctors and health care centers are incentivized to do more and more Nazbandis
[Amit Varma]: and poor uneducated people fall prey to it.
[Amit Varma]: And all the problems that we put on, you know, the door of population that this is happening
[Amit Varma]: because we have too many people is actually something that governance should be blamed
[Amit Varma]: for.
[Amit Varma]: All the failures of our governance are, you know, ascribed to population and I strongly
[Amit Varma]: suspect Prime Minister Modi will again do that to explain his failure of not enough
[Amit Varma]: jobs by attempting to say that there are too many people.
[Amit Varma]: And we should give a response like that.
[Amit Varma]: We should give an explanation like that the response it deserves if it does come about.
[Guest]: So going back to we were talking about simple and simplistic explanations.
[Guest]: So obviously, Donald Trump has used it successfully, and so have, you know, our leaders in India.
[Guest]: I mean, look at the explanation for why is there a slowdown in consumer demand?
[Guest]: It's because millionaires are not buying cars.
[Guest]: Now, the explanation is much simpler to sell than say something like incomes have risen
[Guest]: at a slow pace, and hence people have not been spending money, or the fact that they
[Guest]: don't have much confidence in the economic future, or the fact that they have over borrowed
[Guest]: in the recent past, or the fact that India's so called demographic dividend is collapsing,
[Guest]: or the fact that investment in the Indian economy is collapsed.
[Guest]: I mean, these are all proper nuanced, sometimes difficult to understand arguments, right.
[Guest]: And you know, in our daily lives, in our busy lives, we are basically looking for pointers.
[Guest]: Now, everything in life cannot be a pointer.
[Guest]: But that's why WhatsApp, I mean, we have more graduates graduating out of the University
[Guest]: of WhatsApp than proper universities.
[Amit Varma]: So my sort of question for you, which was coming on from the simplistic thing is that
[Amit Varma]: simplistic narrative sell, like the nativism in our cities, or like farm loan waivers will
[Amit Varma]: solve the problem of agriculture, given that I think both of us would agree that a lot
[Amit Varma]: of good politics makes for bad economics.
[Amit Varma]: What is the way out of this?
[Guest]: I mean, see, ultimately, you know, as a politician, as a leader, you need to be, how do I put
[Amit Varma]: it?
[Amit Varma]: Thinking of the longer term?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you need to do the right thing, unless you I mean, I know, it's a tie to the election
[Guest]: cycle.
[Guest]: No, you are in the next election.
[Guest]: But then I mean, so, you know, I mean, it's not like reforms haven't happened in other
[Guest]: countries and people haven't won elections.
[Guest]: So the problem in India is that no leader ever has tried to explain the utility of economic
[Guest]: reforms to people.
[Guest]: We've always tried to push, you know, reform by stealth, you know, wherein we are in a
[Guest]: crisis.
[Guest]: And so we have to do this.
[Guest]: So no questions asked.
[Guest]: So we push this through.
[Guest]: So that sort of gives a bad name to economic reforms.
[Guest]: But I mean, look at the fact that, you know, what happened in 1991, when the economy was
[Guest]: opened up, large parts of the economy were opened up for the private sector.
[Guest]: I mean, look at the kind of wealth and prosperity it has created, obviously more than 350 million
[Guest]: people brought out of poverty, obviously not for everyone.
[Guest]: It has also led to, I mean, you I know, you don't agree that India has, I mean, inequality
[Amit Varma]: is not an issue in India, because poverty is an issue, I think, I mean, yes.
[Guest]: So you know, it probably hasn't pulled enough people out of poverty and, but it has, you
[Guest]: know, done its fair share of things.
[Amit Varma]: Let me put it like this.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's pulled 350 million people out of poverty.
[Amit Varma]: And there is still a great task, which has moral significance, which is to pull the remaining
[Amit Varma]: people who are still in poverty out of poverty.
[Amit Varma]: And that hasn't happened because we haven't reformed fast enough or gone far enough.
[Guest]: So someone has to sort of, you know, I mean, look at our Prime Minister, he gives so many
[Guest]: speeches, does so many election rallies, I mean, he's connected to the public.
[Guest]: I mean, it's a broadcast, yes.
[Guest]: But he's connected to the public probably more than any other leader in the recent past.
[Guest]: So I think the buck stops with him, because, you know, a finance minister can only be as
[Guest]: good as, as the Prime Minister is, I mean, as much support as he or she gets from the
[Guest]: Prime Minister.
[Guest]: Having said that, I mean, as I said, you know, we need to do a lot of things which governments
[Guest]: know about, all governments know about this.
[Guest]: I mean, you have to bring in land and labour reforms, tax reforms, look at the fact that
[Guest]: education is a huge problem these days.
[Guest]: I mean, so while there is unemployment, at the same time, when companies advertise for
[Guest]: jobs, they do not get people with adequate skill sets.
[Guest]: Most of our engineers are unemployable.
[Guest]: People who sort of go through the school system cannot read, write, do basic math properly.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, that's like you pointed out one of the great ironies, which we've addressed in
[Amit Varma]: every episode on education that I've done, for example, that there is this mismatch between
[Amit Varma]: demand and supply.
[Amit Varma]: There might be a jobs crisis, yes.
[Amit Varma]: But even for jobs that are available, there aren't enough skilled people and you have
[Amit Varma]: like 1000s of PhDs applying for jobs available for peon, which means that the market for
[Amit Varma]: education is failing.
[Amit Varma]: And what I again point out is that all the sectors which were privatised and allowed
[Amit Varma]: to, where the private sector was fully allowed to operate, like airlines or telephones or
[Amit Varma]: whatever, which I remember in the 80s were government monopolies.
[Amit Varma]: We have all thrived there, tremendous value has been created, everyone can, you know,
[Amit Varma]: many more people can afford that value.
[Amit Varma]: But in education, where there is still such a strong government control over the sector,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there's just been, you know, the outcomes are so...
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, in fact, you know, people who complain about call drops these days have
[Guest]: no idea as to how, you know, fixed line phones used to be dead for days at the end.
[Guest]: Because you know, the lineman wouldn't have been bribed properly.
[Amit Varma]: No, and this goes back to the demographic dividend at one sign of the demographic dividend
[Amit Varma]: is that 60% of the country is born after 1991.
[Amit Varma]: But what this also means is that this 60% has no lived experience of what life was like
[Guest]: under those socialist days.
[Guest]: I mean, when you had only one TV channel, when you had one TV channel, which would operate
[Amit Varma]: only in the evenings, it would take you five years to get a telephone line, it would and
[Amit Varma]: that was actually a time where a used car was worth more than a brand new car.
[Amit Varma]: Because you could buy a used car immediately, you could buy a used car immediately, a brand
[Guest]: new car would take six years to come.
[Guest]: So I remember, you know, our telephone connection in Ranchi, I think Papa first applied for
[Guest]: it in 1983.
[Guest]: We finally got it in 1992.
[Amit Varma]: There you go.
[Amit Varma]: Nine years.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Can you even imagine?
[Guest]: Now you can just get it in under nine minutes.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I mean, yeah, I mean, obviously, there are a lot of problems with the current system,
[Amit Varma]: but it is no comparison with what you have to unleash private enterprise, which simply
[Amit Varma]: hasn't happened.
[Amit Varma]: And for people who haven't, you know, read my columns on this before, I quickly want
[Amit Varma]: to clarify the point Vivek was making about inequality and poverty that I think in India,
[Amit Varma]: our key problem is poverty, because the pie is not fixed.
[Amit Varma]: Inequality is not an issue we should worry about simply because as what happens in developing
[Amit Varma]: countries like India, and the data shows this, is that as poverty goes down, inequality inevitably
[Amit Varma]: goes up.
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't mean the rich are getting richer and the poor are getting poorer or staying
[Amit Varma]: poor.
[Amit Varma]: Everybody is getting richer, except the rich are getting richer faster, which leads to
[Amit Varma]: increased inequality, but which also leads to people coming out of poverty.
[Amit Varma]: This is also, you know, people moving to cities is also an illustration of this because cities
[Amit Varma]: have far more inequality than towns do.
[Amit Varma]: And yet people come there because that is a way to get out of poverty.
[Amit Varma]: So India's problem is poverty, not inequality.
[Amit Varma]: Inequality has become a fashionable term and a lot of people when they complain about inequality,
[Amit Varma]: they are at they actually mean poverty and poverty is our moral imperative.
[Amit Varma]: That's what we have to solve.
[Amit Varma]: And the kind of policies which would tackle poverty and inequality are very different
[Amit Varma]: and almost opposite in some cases, which is why I feel that that's distinction which otherwise
[Amit Varma]: seems merely semantic is important.
[Guest]: So you know, we were talking about things that need to be done.
[Guest]: Now, one of the things is, you know, if you look at the ability of tax authorities to
[Guest]: harass us, that continues to remain high.
[Guest]: In fact, I was just reading a news report a few days back, wherein, you know, the tax
[Guest]: authorities have been asked to raise their income tax collections, right?
[Guest]: Now, you know, in an economy which is growing at 7% nominally, the income tax collections
[Guest]: cannot grow at 20%, right?
[Guest]: So when you force them to sort of raise collections, how is that going to happen?
[Guest]: That's only going to happen through harassment.
[Guest]: And the moment you you start harassing entrepreneurs, I mean, you are essentially helping kill the
[Amit Varma]: entire idea of entrepreneurship, I mean, I mean, the term people use for this is tax
[Guest]: terrorism, right?
[Guest]: So, so this this has to go and you know, there are no silver bullets as such.
[Guest]: I mean, there are the all these points which have been written about debated about labor
[Amit Varma]: laws and everything.
[Amit Varma]: Everything.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it's all well known.
[Guest]: It's not like they don't know.
[Guest]: And what I find funny is when you know, the Minister of Finance asks for suggestions from
[Guest]: people on what she should do in the budget.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I just find that bizarre.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, as if she doesn't know what is to be done.
[Amit Varma]: And if she doesn't know, she doesn't.
[Amit Varma]: As if a lot of it wasn't in the 2014 manifesto.
[Amit Varma]: I had the Congress politician Salman shows on my show a few months ago.
[Amit Varma]: And he was saying how when Mr. Modi came to power in 2014, he in the Congress was actually
[Amit Varma]: a little bit hopeful, because there was a lot in their manifesto, which he agreed with
[Amit Varma]: in terms of reforms, and they've carried out none of those.
[Guest]: In fact, these days, there's this I mean, what I find really bizarre is that there is
[Guest]: this small scale industry which has come up with things that redistribution will lead
[Guest]: to economic growth.
[Guest]: I mean, I find that I mean, you know, whether you are in favor of redistribution or against
[Guest]: it is a different argument.
[Guest]: But redistribution has not led to development anywhere in the world, right?
[Guest]: I mean, there's a trade off between redistribution and growth.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes you make that trade off on the side of redistribution, because you feel it's
[Amit Varma]: a moral imperative, you have to help the poor.
[Guest]: But you should have to be aware that there is a trade off.
[Guest]: And also, you know, redistribution can also only happen once some wealth has been created,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Like, you know, I remember this line from this, this movie, which Ketan Mehta made with
[Guest]: Shah Rukh Khan and his wife, Deepa, it was called Oh, Darling, Yeh Hai India.
[Guest]: And there's a line in the in the title song of the movie, which goes Jo bacha nahi, wo
[Guest]: baat diya.
[Guest]: So what you haven't saved, that also you're distributing.
[Guest]: I mean, so obviously, you're going to get so redistribution beyond the point where there
[Amit Varma]: is I mean, what do you redistribute, you need to first earn that money to redistribute it.
[Amit Varma]: This goes to the point that people often make about the Scandinavian states, that what about
[Amit Varma]: the Scandinavian states, their welfare states, the point to note is that they were incredible
[Amit Varma]: free markets until the point that they got so massively prosperous, that on their small
[Amit Varma]: scales, they could actually afford to become welfare states and tax a lot and redistribute
[Amit Varma]: a lot.
[Amit Varma]: And they actually started turning back on some of that when it started hurting, but
[Guest]: they were already at very prosperous.
[Guest]: Also, what people don't get is that as far as entrepreneurship is concerned, it still
[Guest]: thrives out there.
[Unknown]: I mean, people are encouraged.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So being a welfare state doesn't mean that you don't let people do business.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something that people don't get.
[Guest]: What about Scandinavia?
[Guest]: First, look at the per capita income.
[Amit Varma]: And also, you know, like Elkar and Shah in their book, they make a very interesting observation
[Amit Varma]: also, where they point out that one data point worth looking at very closely is the flight
[Amit Varma]: of millionaires.
[Amit Varma]: And this might seem completely irrelevant to a poor country that let the millionaires
[Amit Varma]: go, what difference does it make?
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, these are your wealth creators, who generate jobs, who generate employment,
[Amit Varma]: who generate growth, who are all choosing to leave en masse.
[Amit Varma]: And what you do not see what is seen as a flight of these millionaires, but what is
[Amit Varma]: then unseen is a many other prospective millionaires who don't come up who would in a counterfactual
[Amit Varma]: because you've created conditions that are antithetical if you want to create
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Ultimately, you know, growth is the only antidote to poverty.
[Guest]: And this is a simple point that, you know, which our politicians don't seem to understand.
[Guest]: And by politicians, I don't just mean the current set, but all of them in general.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, yeah, you know, one one interesting observation that I completely agree with that
[Amit Varma]: which our friend Shruti Rajgopalan, who's also a frequent guest, I made in a column
[Amit Varma]: which came out today, we are recording on December 24, is that this what is happening
[Amit Varma]: in India currently, both in social terms with the CIA and all of this and also in economic
[Amit Varma]: terms, displays the government social engineering mindset, or you could say the engineering
[Amit Varma]: mindset, where they have a vision of society and they want to create it with all of these
[Amit Varma]: top down actions, whether it is in a social context, or whether it is in the economic
[Amit Varma]: context.
[Amit Varma]: And there still isn't the realization that social engineering never works.
[Amit Varma]: It always has terrible unintended consequences, that what the job of a state is to protect
[Amit Varma]: the rights of every individual and then let them interact freely within the rule of law
[Amit Varma]: so that everyone can, you know, reach their full potential.
[Guest]: So, you know, so why don't you share the Mao example also?
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So the Mao example, which Kelkar and Shah used in their book, which is something that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, right after demonetization happened, the first column I wrote for the Times of
[Amit Varma]: India after that the example I gave was how Mao decided that because sparrows were destroying
[Amit Varma]: crops, all sparrows should be killed.
[Amit Varma]: So he gave an idea, kill all sparrows, right?
[Amit Varma]: That's his attempt at saving crops.
[Amit Varma]: But what happened was that the fragile ecosystem went completely out of whack, the sparrows
[Amit Varma]: were killed, and insects, especially locusts proliferated and the crops were destroyed
[Amit Varma]: anyway.
[Amit Varma]: And it was a massive economic disaster.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what this tells you is that a certain kind of social engineering on such a grand
[Amit Varma]: scale is flawed, even if you cannot predict exactly what will happen, people may not have
[Amit Varma]: known the ecosystem so well to know that if sparrows are killed, locusts will destroy
[Amit Varma]: the crops.
[Amit Varma]: But simply because there are all these massive unintended consequences, that you should keep
[Amit Varma]: your interventions as small and local and measurable and reversible as possible all
[Amit Varma]: points which Kelkar and Shah make in the episode you'll hear next week.
[Amit Varma]: And and for that reason, you know, such social engineering always backfires and is similar
[Amit Varma]: to what Modi tried with demonetization.
[Amit Varma]: That's a comparison I then made and which Kelkar and Shah also made in this book that
[Amit Varma]: such grand attempts at social engineering always fail and yet, we have this engineering
[Amit Varma]: mindset all around us, where people imagine that because they can design a machine or
[Amit Varma]: they can run a company that they can actually design an economy and construct a society
[Amit Varma]: and that simply isn't possible, it is always bound to fail and has led to nothing but heartbreak
[Amit Varma]: and misery every time it's been tried through the 20th century by both the left wing and
[Guest]: the right wing.
[Guest]: Right, so I think, you know, one of the things that we still haven't talked about is 2019
[Guest]: was also the year when our monetary policy went for a toss.
[Amit Varma]: What is monetary policy for up for my listeners?
[Guest]: Just explain.
[Guest]: Monetary policy is basically the interest rate policy that the nation's central bank
[Guest]: decides on.
[Amit Varma]: So is the RBI decides.
[Guest]: The RBI in the Indian case through the Monetary Policy Committee decides on.
[Guest]: So they decide to sort of either raise or, you know, decrease what is called as what
[Guest]: is called the repo rate.
[Guest]: So repo rate is the rate at which the RBI gives loans to banks.
[Guest]: So Shaktikanta Das led RBI has cut the repo rate by 135 basis points from 6.5% to 5.15%.
[Guest]: The hope was that banks would also cut interest rates as the RBI cut the repo rate.
[Guest]: Now, what has happened instead is that if you look at the weighted average lending rate
[Guest]: of banks, instead of going down, it's gone up.
[Guest]: So it's gone up from around 10.35% at the beginning of the year to 10.4% I think as
[Guest]: of October, if I remember correctly.
[Guest]: So now what has happened?
[Guest]: I mean, this is something that a lot of people are baffled about.
[Guest]: And you know, what you need to understand here is, again, if you're the kind who just
[Guest]: reads Times of India, you will see that every time there is a repo rate cut, the next day
[Guest]: the headline that is run is repo rate cut, home loan EMIs, EMIs, whatever, vehicle EMIs
[Guest]: to come down.
[Guest]: But that's not how it actually works.
[Guest]: Now, how does a bank operate?
[Guest]: You know, a bank borrows money from all of us, and then it lends money at a higher rate.
[Guest]: Now, if you look at the cost of borrowing, which is primarily through deposits, so if
[Guest]: you look at the cost of borrowing of term deposits of banks, it's gone down slightly
[Guest]: in the last, since the beginning of this year, it's gone down by around 12 basis points.
[Guest]: And the RBI has cut rate by 135 basis points.
[Guest]: So unless the cost of deposits come down, the lending rate on loans will not come down.
[Guest]: I mean, this is as basic as it gets, the RBI can keep cutting the repo rate.
[Guest]: Now, why is the cost of deposits not coming down?
[Guest]: Now, if you remember what we sort of talked about earlier, I had said that the financial
[Guest]: savings, the net financial savings of India as a whole has come down in the last few years.
[Guest]: And I explained as to why it has come down.
[Guest]: Now, in this scenario, banks, in order to encourage people to save, need to offer them
[Guest]: a good rate of interest, so they are not in a position to cut interest rates, or not as
[Guest]: much as the RBI wants them to.
[Guest]: The other thing that has happened, and a lot of people don't seem to know about this, is
[Guest]: that the overall public sector borrowing, and by this, I mean, the real deficit run
[Guest]: by the central government, these fiscal deficits of the state governments, the borrowings of
[Guest]: organizations like the Food Corporation of India, this has gone up over the years, I
[Guest]: mean, it used to be around 8% of the GDP, now it's more than 9%.
[Guest]: So in an environment where the financial savings have come down, government borrowing is going
[Guest]: up.
[Guest]: So in this environment, expecting interest rates to fall is a little silly, okay.
[Guest]: So now what does this tell us?
[Guest]: It tells us as to how intricately linked everything is in the economy, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you know, it tells us as to, given the fact that India has gone the way it has,
[Guest]: where investment is not happening, because of that consumption is being financed through
[Guest]: savings.
[Guest]: And because consumption is being financed through increased savings, you know, savings
[Guest]: have fallen.
[Guest]: And because of that, banks cannot cut interest rates on their deposits.
[Guest]: And because of that, they can't cut interest rates on their loans.
[Guest]: It's all, you know, in economics, they used to teach the vicious circle of poverty.
[Guest]: India is poor because India is poor.
[Guest]: So this is sort of, you know, the vicious circle of India's lack of economic growth.
[Guest]: I mean, if we can call it that.
[Guest]: So this is something that, you know, has to be tackled.
[Guest]: The only way it can be tackled is through increased savings, right?
[Guest]: Now, how will people increase savings?
[Guest]: One is if they consume less, but if they consume less, it hurts the economy, right?
[Guest]: So the way to increase savings is essentially to increase incomes.
[Guest]: Now, in order to increase incomes, investment has to happen.
[Guest]: For investment to happen, the government has to create the right conditions.
[Guest]: Also, before that, the consumption slowdown has to unravel, because businesses won't invest
[Guest]: until, you know, consumers start consuming.
[Guest]: So to sort of solve that problem, you know, one of the things that the government could
[Guest]: have done is to cut down on the personal income tax rates, but they chose to cut down on corporate
[Guest]: taxes, which helped no one because it just helped push up corporate earnings, and money
[Guest]: did not end up in the hands of people who could spend it.
[Guest]: So yeah, I mean, so this is basically, you know, how intricately linked everything is.
[Guest]: And at times, it's not the solutions are not.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I have like two thoughts kind of strike me in response to this.
[Amit Varma]: One is, of course, how incredible perverse it is that while private savings are going
[Amit Varma]: down, government borrowing is going up, that while private consumption is growing at a
[Amit Varma]: slower pace, government spending is going up, you know, and the one way of getting out
[Amit Varma]: of this vicious cycle where we are saving less and spending less because we have lower
[Amit Varma]: incomes is, of course, like you pointed out, a cut in the personal income tax rate so that
[Amit Varma]: people just have more to sort of, you leave more money with the people to spend, so that
[Amit Varma]: they will spend more and save more, and that can help us come out of that cycle.
[Amit Varma]: The other sort of thing that struck me was how you pointed out that everything is so
[Amit Varma]: intricately linked, which is also why people in government imagine that with public policy
[Amit Varma]: by using different levers, one lever here, one lever there, they can influence the process,
[Amit Varma]: not having the humility to realize that the process is so deeply complicated that every
[Amit Varma]: intervention has unintended consequences, and therefore, you're better off sticking
[Amit Varma]: to certain first principles.
[Guest]: And basically, you're better off just letting people carry out honest entrepreneurial activity.
[Guest]: As long as you do that, you know, you will get your share of taxes, people will make
[Guest]: their share of income and, but as you know, it's it's easier said than done.
[Guest]: So, right.
[Amit Varma]: So, so, you know, certainly, you've looked at the economy very closely for like 15, 16
[Amit Varma]: years or whatever, and year on year, you know, things have changed, you look at the data,
[Amit Varma]: how have your feelings about what is happening evolved over this time?
[Amit Varma]: And do you feel that 2019 is particularly worse?
[Amit Varma]: Is there a reason to be worried?
[Guest]: Like, I mean, yes, I mean, 2019 has been worse from the data point of view, there is no denying
[Guest]: that but I think what I find more worrying and, and I've said this many times before
[Guest]: is the brazenness of this government in not admitting that there is a problem.
[Guest]: I mean, as I say, over and over again, is how do you solve a problem without admitting
[Guest]: to it?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So, I mean, so unless you do that, I mean, yeah, I hope in 2020, they see, I mean, they
[Guest]: lose a few more elections, and finally, some sense comes in.
[Amit Varma]: So, yeah,
[Guest]: But it's less likely to lead to economic reforms and more likely to lead to social polarization.
[Guest]: Even more rhetoric of the kind that is not good for the, I mean, I'm just waiting for
[Amit Varma]: them to come up with the population rhetoric and blame the failures of governments on too
[Amit Varma]: many people.
[Amit Varma]: And that's so totally going to happen.
[Amit Varma]: We've kind of, you know, spoken about 2019 and how dismal it has been in 2020.
[Amit Varma]: What will save us?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of the things I think about in these troubled times is that what will
[Amit Varma]: save us is art, like, I look around me and not just in the protest movements, but even
[Amit Varma]: in general, the quality of cartooning has just gone to a new level, because there is
[Amit Varma]: so much happening that is so surreal that, you know, comics have so much material to
[Guest]: play with.
[Guest]: In fact, I was just thinking about it the other day, and that, so there used to be one
[Guest]: of the big protest poets in Pakistan was a gentleman called Habib Jaleeb.
[Guest]: And he wrote some of his best poetry under the dictatorship of Zia-ul-Haq.
[Guest]: And a couple of his, you know, famous poems, one is called Main Nahin Manta and the other
[Guest]: is called Hukmara.
[Guest]: It's essentially about intellectuals who kowtow to the government.
[Guest]: And he'd written it on this other big Pakistani poet called Hafiz Jalandhri, who had essentially
[Guest]: become an advisor to Ayub Khan.
[Guest]: Anyway, that's different.
[Guest]: But what I'm trying to say is that, Habib Jaleeb would have been proud with the kind
[Guest]: of protest poetry that's coming out now, especially the one that, you know, Varun Glover,
[Amit Varma]: Hum Kagaz Nahin Dikhayenge,
[Amit Varma]: which is brilliant, and which, which works for all 72 years of India, boss, if you kind
[Guest]: of look at it.
[Guest]: I mean, the simplicity of it is just, I mean, the way he captures the emotion is just superb.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's just superb.
[Amit Varma]: And similar sound and I think same number of syllables as to Hum Mandir Wahin Banayenge.
[Amit Varma]: Which is, which is the point, which is the point, right?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's brilliant.
[Amit Varma]: Which is how he
[Guest]: Hum Kagaz Nahin Dikhayenge,
[Amit Varma]: Hum Mandir Wahin Banayenge.
[Amit Varma]: So, Vivek, iss, iss mauke pe aap bhi kuchh suna do yaar.
[Guest]: Haan, actually.
[Guest]: So, this is something by, I mean, I wish I could write poetry like the way our great
[Guest]: Urdu poets do.
[Guest]: So, this is a poem by Rahat Indori, not a poem, it's just a couplet by Rahat Indori,
[Guest]: who is one of the greatest Urdu poets alive.
[Guest]: And it's in the context of whatever is happening in India right now.
[Guest]: And he says, ke adhe the zith pe, ki sooraj bana ke chhodenge, ke adhe the zith pe, ki
[Guest]: sooraj bana ke chhodenge, paseene chhoot gaye ek diya banane me.
[Guest]: So, you know, it's very difficult to build the most simple of things.
[Guest]: So forget about, you know, big things like demonetization and
[Amit Varma]: We were adamant that we will build a new sun and yet we are sweating over a mere candle
[Amit Varma]: on the spot, off the cuff.
[Amit Varma]: Translation by me, please forgive if something went wrong.
[Guest]: No, no, it's perfectly right.
[Guest]: So, in fact, you have a job coming up as a translator.
[Amit Varma]: I have no job.
[Guest]: Given that both of us, you know, the economic activities that we indulge in aren't really
[Guest]: happening.
[Guest]: So, we are poor podcasters who are doing this for the love of it and the greater benefit
[Guest]: of mankind.
[Amit Varma]: Humankind.
[Amit Varma]: So kindly watch your language, we shall instantly cancel you.
[Amit Varma]: All episodes of Vivek Kaul will disappear from the scene in the scene archives.
[Amit Varma]: So should I ask you the hope and despair question, boss?
[Amit Varma]: Yes, sure.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Guest]: So consider it asked.
[Guest]: What gives you hope and what gives you despair about 2020 since we were speaking at the granular
[Guest]: level of a year?
[Guest]: I think the despair is obviously what is happening all around us and the fact that the media
[Guest]: has been so subdued.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, one tends to get more news from what people share on the social media
[Guest]: now than the real media.
[Guest]: I mean, like the other day, there was this huge march in Dharavi, I mean, which barely
[Guest]: made it to the newspapers, whereas it was there all over the social media.
[Guest]: So that is the huge and the fact that so many educated people, so many people in my immediate,
[Guest]: you know, some of my best friends, immediate family, by this entire idea of NRC and, and
[Guest]: the citizen amendment thing.
[Guest]: So I find that very, very disturbing because, I mean, when the people you're closest to
[Guest]: believe in these things, I mean, how do you talk to them?
[Guest]: Or more than that, why should you talk to them?
[Guest]: Forget how do you talk to them?
[Guest]: That really is disturbing me.
[Guest]: The hope obviously, at the end of the day, as I've always said, is the people of India,
[Guest]: because I mean, and that's been shown in the last few days, where people have actually
[Guest]: come out, you know, against what, you know, Modi and Shah have been trying to do.
[Guest]: And so that gives you hope and you know, the funny thing is, and I was just thinking about
[Guest]: it the other day that, you know, when Modi made this speech in Delhi, and he said that,
[Guest]: whatever he did about NRC and the fact that, you know, Amit Shah had sort of contradicted
[Guest]: it over and over again.
[Guest]: So I was I was just wondering, you know, has Narendra Modi also reached a stage where he's
[Guest]: become the mukhota of the BJP?
[Amit Varma]: I think that's wishful thinking, I think, without necessarily thinking of it in those
[Amit Varma]: terms are kind of playing good cop, bad cop, and also, a large part of the population will
[Amit Varma]: believe anything they say.
[Guest]: So Modi can just say, that's the thing, you know, what they're basically doing is that,
[Guest]: you know, one guy is saying one thing, the other guy is saying the other thing.
[Amit Varma]: And basically, all kinds of audiences taken care of, I mean, I'm going to invoke the philosopher
[Amit Varma]: Harry Frankfurt, Harry Frankfurt wrote the superb essay in 1986, which later was released
[Amit Varma]: as a book in 2003, called On Bullshit, where he said that bullshit is different from lies.
[Amit Varma]: Lies is when you care about the truth, you acknowledge the truth, but you choose to deliberately
[Amit Varma]: deceive somebody by lying.
[Amit Varma]: Bullshit, it has no relationship with the truth.
[Amit Varma]: You don't care if what you are saying is true or untrue.
[Amit Varma]: You just say it at the spur of the moment, because it sounds good.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a thing to say.
[Amit Varma]: And this is true for a lot of things Donald Trump says on Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: And once of course, having come up with some spontaneous bullshit, he will always keep
[Amit Varma]: doubling down on it.
[Amit Varma]: But I think of, for example, Modi's speech as like, of course, it was full of untruths.
[Amit Varma]: But was he lying?
[Amit Varma]: Or was he bullshitting?
[Amit Varma]: And that's, that's a question I'll leave it to listeners to answer.
[Amit Varma]: Any final comments?
[Amit Varma]: You did not mention what gives you hope?
[Guest]: I said the hopes, the people, I mean, people as in the, you know, at least some of them
[Guest]: who will probably end up doing the right thing.
[Guest]: Not all of them, actually.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So on that, on that bleak yet hopeful note, we shall end this episode of The Seen and
[Amit Varma]: the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks for coming on the show, man, Vivek.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks, Amit, for having me.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, hop on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and search for Vivek Kaul by every book he has written.
[Amit Varma]: Do not search for my name.
[Amit Varma]: And you can follow Vivek on Twitter at Kaul underscore Vivek.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, that's A-M-I-T-V-E-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen at seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution.
[Amit Varma]: You can read more about them at takshashila.org.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening, and have a good year.